Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills

Riad Akrour 1 Dmitry Sorokin 1 Jan Peters 1 2 Gerhard Neumann 1 3

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is renowned for its sample efficiency but its application to higher dimensional tasks is impeded by its focus on global
optimization. To scale to higher dimensional
problems, we leverage the sample efficiency of
Bayesian optimization in a local context. The
optimization of the acquisition function is restricted to the vicinity of a Gaussian search distribution which is moved towards high value areas of the objective. The proposed informationtheoretic update of the search distribution results
in a Bayesian interpretation of local stochastic search: the search distribution encodes prior
knowledge on the optimum’s location and is
weighted at each iteration by the likelihood of
this location’s optimality. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our algorithm on several benchmark objective functions as well as a continuous
robotic task in which an informative prior is obtained by imitation learning.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning, supported
by the ability of generating and processing large amounts
of data, allowed impressive achievements such as playing
Atari at human level (Mnih et al., 2015) or mastering the
game of Go (Silver et al., 2016). In robotics however, sample complexity is paramount as sample generation on physical systems cannot be sped up and can cause wear and
damage to the robot when excessive (Kober et al., 2013).
Relying on a simulator to carry the learning will inevitably
result in a reality gap, since mechanical forces such as
stiction are hard to accurately model. However, a policy
learned in a simulated environment can still be valuable
provided the availability of a sample efficient algorithm to
1
CLAS/IAS, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany 2 Max
Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 LCAS, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Riad Akrour <riad@robot-learning.de>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

carry an additional optimization phase on the physical system.
Bayesian optimization is best known as a black-box global
optimizer (Brochu et al., 2010; Shahriari et al., 2016). It
was shown to be efficient for several function landscapes
(Jones, 2001), real world scenarios such as the automatic
tuning of machine learning algorithms (Bergstra et al.,
2011; Snoek et al., 2012; Feurer et al., 2015) or robotics and
control (Lizotte et al., 2007; Wilson et al., 2014; Calandra
et al., 2016) and several of its variants have convergence
guaranties to a global optimum (Vazquez & Bect, 2010;
Bull, 2011). Its efficiency stems from two key principles: a
probabilistic modeling of the objective function and a sampling procedure that fully exploits this model. However,
as the dimensionality of the task increases, non-stationarity
effects of the objective or the noise function (see Shahriari et al. (2016), Sec. V.D. for a discussion of these effects) are exacerbated, rendering the modeling of the objective function challenging. An additional difficulty stemming from the increase in dimensionality is the tendency
of Bayesian optimization to over-explore, which was experimentally observed in e.g. Brochu et al. (2007). Several
recent approaches trying to scale Bayesian optimization to
higher dimensions assume additional structure of the objective function. In Snoek et al. (2014), it is assumed that stationarity of the objective function can be recovered through
the use of a parametric family of mappings. While it is assumed that the objective function has a lower intrinsic dimension in Djolonga et al. (2013); Wang et al. (2016), can
be decomposable into a sum of lower dimensional functions in Kandasamy et al. (2015) or a combination of both
hypothesis in Li et al. (2016).
In this paper, we assume prior knowledge on the location
of the optimum—given by an initial solution and a confidence on the optimality thereof—and leverage Bayesian
optimization in a local manner to improve over this solution. We are especially interested in the application of our
algorithm to the optimization of motor skills since i) evaluating the policy return is expensive on physical systems and
will likely dominate the computational budget of the optimization process; as such, sample efficient algorithms such
as Bayesian optimization are desirable ii) robotics applications are typically high dimensional and global optimization might be prohibitively expensive iii) an initial solution

Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills

can often be obtained through the use of imitation learning (Argall et al., 2009) or by a preliminary optimization
on a surrogate model such as a simulator.

2. Related work
Our algorithm can be seen as a local stochastic search
algorithm akin to Covariance Matrix Adaptation (CMAES) (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001), cross-entropy (Mannor et al., 2003) or MOdel-based Relative Entropy
(MORE) (Abdolmaleki et al., 2015). Local stochastic
search algorithms typically maintain a Gaussian search distribution from which samples are generated, the objective
function is evaluated and the search distribution is updated.
As in Bayesian optimization, they are of particular use
when the gradient of the objective function is unknown.
Their use as a black-box optimization routine is gaining
popularity in the machine learning community, e.g. in reinforcement learning (Thomas et al., 2015) or even for hyperparameter tuning (Bergstra et al., 2011) and the optimization of the acquisition function (Wang et al., 2016) of global
Bayesian optimization.
Our algorithm shares the same general structure as local stochastic search algorithms and additionally learns
a (probabilistic) model of the objective function. Modeling the objective function was already explored in the
stochastic search literature. A surrogate function is learned
in (Loshchilov et al., 2013) using SVM-Rank, and is optimized using CMA-ES for a few iterations, yielding an
update of the search distribution without requiring additional function evaluations. While in MORE (Abdolmaleki
et al., 2015), a local quadratic approximation of the objective function yields the new mean and covariance of the
Gaussian search distribution upon an information-theoretic
update. Unlike these algorithms, we do not optimize the
learned (probabilistic) model, but derive from it p(x =
x? |D), the probability of x being optimal. Our search distribution is then updated such as to minimize the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence to p(x = x? |D). Compared to
these surrogate assisted local stochastic search algorithms
(Loshchilov et al., 2013; Abdolmaleki et al., 2015), the
transformation of the optimization landscape (minimizing
the KL-divergence to p(x = x? |D) instead of the objective function) facilitates learning of the surrogate model by
lowering the variance in poorly performing regions, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
To approximate p(x = x? |D) we rely on a probabilistic
modeling of the objective function and to select the next
point to sample we locally optimize an acquisition function. As such, our algorithm can also be seen as Bayesian
optimization where the usual box constraint is moved towards a high value area of the objective function to restrict
exploration.

Algorithm 1 Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills
Input: Initial policy π0 = N (µ0 , σ02 I), step-size , entropy reduction rate β
Output: Policy πN
for n = 1 to N do
Fit: Gaussian pbn from local samples of p?n (Sec. 3.2)
Optimize: (η ∗ , ω ∗ ) = arg min gn (η, ω)
(Sec. 3.1.1)
?
η ? +ω ?
Bayesian Update: (πn+1 )
∝ πnη p?n (Sec. 3.1.1)
Evaluate: xn from local samples of p?n
(Sec. 3.3)
Dn ←− Dn−1 ∪ {(xn , yn )}
end for

In reinforcement learning, probabilistic modeling was used
to e.g. learn a transition model (Deisenroth & Rasmussen,
2011) or the policy gradient (Ghavamzadeh et al., 2016)
with Gaussian processes. Closer to our work, the use of
an adaptive box constraint was explored in Bayesian optimization to ensure a safe optimization of a robot controller
(Berkenkamp et al., 2016; Englert & Toussaint, 2016).
Considering safety is crucial for motor skill learning on
physical systems to prevent the evaluation of ’dangerous’
parameters. Both approaches restrict exploration to an initial safe region of the parameter space that is incrementally
expanded using additional problem assumptions. Without
such assumptions our algorithm cannot guarantee safety
but its local nature is expected to dampen the potential risk
of global Bayesian optimization.

3. Local Bayesian optimization
Let f : Rd 7→ R be an objective function. For example
f (x) can be the expected reward of a robot controller parameterized by x ∈ Rd . We assume that the algorithm only
has access to noisy evaluations y = f (x) + , where  ∼
N (0, σs2 ) is Gaussian noise of unknown deviation σs . The
algorithm will produce a sequence {(x1 , y1 ) . . . (xN , yN )}
of parameter-evaluation pairs
P and the goal is to minimize
the cumulative regret N1 i f (x? ) − yi for some global
maximizer x? of f . The cumulative regret emphasizes
the inherent cost in evaluating a bad parameter, potentially
causing wear and damage to the robot.
Prior knowledge on an optimum’s location x? is given
to the algorithm by a Gaussian distribution π0 =
N (µ0 , σ02 I). In what follows we will indistinctly refer to
π as a search distribution or a policy following the terminology of the stochastic search and reinforcement learning
(RL) communities. In an RL context, an informative prior
can often be obtained from human generated data or from a
simulator. Specifically, we assume that the mean µ0 of π0
is obtained by imitation learning if near-optimal demonstrations are available or by a preliminary optimization on
a less accurate but inexpensive model of the system dy-

Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills
4

4

4
2

4

4

2

2

2

2

0

0

0

-2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

-2

-2

-4

-4

-4

-6

-6

-6

-8

-8

-8
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

(a) Objective function f .

-6

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

(b) Search distribution.

-6

-8
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

-8
-4

(c) Quad. approx. of f .

-3

-2

-1

0

1

(d) GP approx. of f .

2

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

(e) Gaussian approx.
p(x? |D).

2

of

Figure 1. The benefits of minimizing the KL divergence to p(x? |D) instead of maximizing a local approximation of the objective
function f . a) The objective function f has two modes illustrated by the red (higher mode) and blue (lower mode) stars. b) The search
distribution π draws samples in the area of both modes. The samples and their evaluation are stored in D. c) The quadratic approximation
of f (minimizing the empirical mean squared error on D) captures variations of f even in low value areas and result in a poor orientation
for the search distribution update as illustrated by the model’s optimum (magenta star in (c)). On the other side, the Gaussian process
approximation of f (shown in (d)) is confident enough in its approximation for p(x? |D) to sample mainly around the higher mode (red
star, see (e)). As a result, the Gaussian approximation of p(x? |D) only focuses on high value areas and results in a better direction for
the search distribution update than the quadratic model of f .

namics. Whereas σ0 is a hyper-parameter of the algorithm,
manually set in our experiments, and expressing the confidence in the optimality of µ0 .

tions can be used to obtain our search distribution update.

The search distribution πn is updated by solving the optimization problem formally defined in Sec. 3.1.1. The
objective of the optimization problem is to minimize the
KL divergence between πn and p(x = x? |Dn ), the probability of x? being optimal according to the data set of
parameter-evaluation pairs Dn . Solving this problem results in a Bayesian update, as shown in Alg. 1, where the
prior πn (x) on the optimality of x is weighted by the likelihood p(x = x? |Dn ) of x being optimal according to Dn .
Letting the likelihood p(x = x? |Dn ) be denoted by p?n (x),
the first step of the algorithm is to fit pbn , a Gaussian approximation of p?n (Sec. 3.2). Subsequently, a dual function is
optimized (Sec. 3.1.1) to make sure that the search distribution moves slowly towards p? as new evaluations are collected. Modulating the Bayesian update with the dual parameters η ∗ and ω ∗ is important since Dn is initially empty
and p?n not initially informative. Finally, a new evaluations
of f is requested by selecting xn from the previously generated samples of p?n and the process is iterated.

The search distribution is updated such that its KL divergence w.r.t. p?n is minimized. Since future evaluations of f
will be performed around the updated search distribution,
it becomes critical to control the change of distribution between iterations by constraining the aforementioned minimization problem. These constraints will ensure that the
exploration is not reduced too fast or that the mean is not
moved too quickly from the initial solution µ0 . The resulting optimization problem is given by

The next subsections give a detailed presentation of both
the search distribution update and the sampling procedure
from p?n .
3.1. Search distribution update
The search distribution in our algorithm is updated such as
to minimize the KL divergence between πn and p?n . The
resulting optimization problem is closely related to the one
solved by the MORE algorithm (Abdolmaleki et al., 2015).
In the next subsections, we will first formalize our search
distribution update before briefly describing the search distribution update of MORE and showing how their deriva-

3.1.1. T HE OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM

arg min
π

subject to

KL(π k p?n ),
KL(π k πn )

≤ ,

(1)

H(πn ) − H(π)

≤ β,

(2)

R
is the KL diverwhere KL(p k q) = p(x) log p(x)
q(x) dx
R
gence between p and q and H(p) = − p(x) log(p(x))dx
is the entropy of p. The hyper-parameters  and β respectively bound the change in distribution and the reduction in
entropy between successive iterations.
The use of the KL divergence to constrain the update is
widespread in the reinforcement learning community (Peters et al., 2010; Schulman et al., 2015). When the search
distributions π and πn are of Gaussian form, the KL divergence in Eq. (1) is impacted by three factors. On one side,
by the change in entropy between the two distributions—
having a direct impact on the exploration rate. On the other
side, by the displacement of the mean and the rotation of
the covariance matrix—not impacting the exploration rate.
To better control the exploration, we choose to decouple

Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills

the reduction in entropy from the KL constraint. It was
shown in (Abdolmaleki et al., 2015) that the additional entropy constraint can lead to significantly better solutions at
the expense of a slower start.
The optimization problem defined in this section is closely
related to the one solved by MORE. In fact, when the inequality (2) is replaced by the equality constraint H(πn ) −
H(π) = β for both algorithms then the two problems coincide; while only a small modification of the dual function
is necessary otherwise. For the sake of clarity and to keep
the paper self-contained, we will briefly introduce MORE
before showing how we can reuse their derivation of the
search distribution update in our algorithm.
3.1.2. M ODEL -BASED R ELATIVE E NTROPY S EARCH
MORE (Abdolmaleki et al., 2015) is a local stochastic
search algorithm where the search distribution πn (x) is updated by solving the following constrained problem
Z
arg max
π(x)f (x)dx
π

subject to

KL(π k πn )

≤ ,

(3)

H(πn ) − H(π)

≤ β,

(4)

An analytic solution of the problem is obtained by locally
approximating f with the quadratic model
1
Rn (x) = − xT Rn x + xT r n + rn ,
2
learned by linear regression from the data set Dn . Letting
the search distribution πn (x) = N (x|µn , Σn ) at iteration
n be parameterized by the mean µn and covariance matrix
Σn , the aforementioned optimization problem yields the
closed form update where the new mean and covariance
are given by

(5)
Σ−1
= (η ? + ω ? )−1 η ? Σ−1
n + Rn ,
n+1

?
? −1
? −1
µn+1 = (η + ω ) Σn+1 η Σn µn + r n , (6)
where η ? and ω ? are the Lagrange multipliers of the constraints (3) and (4) respectively, and are obtained by minimizing the dual function gn (η, ω) by gradient descent (Abdolmaleki et al., 2015).
As can be seen in Eq. 5, the new covariance matrix is a
trade-off between the old covariance and the local curvature of the objective function f —where the trade-off parameters are computed in order to satisfy both constraints
of the optimization problem. As such, it is appropriate to
use the covariance matrix of the search distribution in the
kernel function for the local approximation of f when using GP regression.
We additionally define MORE with equality constraint as
a variant of MORE where the inequality constraint in (4)

is replaced with the equality constraint H(πn ) − H(π) =
β, forcing the reduction in entropy at each iteration to be
exactly β. This modification will not change the shape of
the update but only the Lagrange multipliers, that can be
obtained by simply alleviating the constraint ω ≥ 0 in the
minimization of gn (η, ω).
3.1.3. O PTIMIZATION PROBLEMS ’ EQUIVALENCE
We now show that the optimization problem in our algorithm can be phrased as the optimization problem solved
by MORE for the equality entropy constraint; while only a
small modification of the dual minimization is required for
the inequality entropy constraint. The equivalence of the
optimization problems will allow us to use Eq. 5 and 6 to
update our search distribution.
Proposition 1. The optimization problem in Sec. 3.1.1 can
be reduced to the optimization problem in 3.1.2 for the objective function f = log p?n when both problems enforce an
exact entropy reduction constraint on π.
Proof. We first rephrase the problem in Sec. 3.1.1 as the
maximization over π of
−KL(π k p?n ) + β − H(πn ),
where we switched the sign of the KL divergence term and
added the constant term β − H(πn ). These modifications
will not change the value of the stationary points of the
Lagrangian. The resulting Lagrangian is
Z
L(π, η, ω) =

π(x) log p?n (x)dx+η(−KL(π k πn ))
+ (ω + 1)(H(π) − H(πn ) + β),

with dual variables η ≥ 0 and ω ∈ R and where we have
split the term KL(π k p?n ) into the expected log-density of
p?n and the entropy H(π) of π. A MORE formulation with
similar entropy and KL divergence constraints and where
the objective is to maximize the log-density log p?n yields
the Lagrangian
L0 (π, η, ω) =

Z

π(x) log p?n (x)dx+η(−KL(π k πn ))
+ ω(H(π) − H(πn ) + β).

Since we have no constraint on ω, it is easy to see that
the dual variable minimizing the dual of the first problem
ω ? and of the second (MORE) problem ω 0∗ are related by
ω ? = ω 0∗ − 1 and both problems will result in the same
update of π.
Intuitively, the minimization of KL(π k p?n ) can be reduced
to the maximization (in expectation of π) of the log-density

Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills

log p?n because the equality constraint H(π) = H(πn ) − β
annihilates the effect of the additional entropy term H(π)
coming from the KL objective.
From Proposition 1 and following the derivations in (Abdolmaleki et al., 2015), the search distribution πn+1 solution of the optimization problem in Sec. 3.1.1 is given by
η?

1

πn+1 ∝ (πn ) η? +ω? (p?n ) η? +ω? ,

(7)

where η ? and ω ? are the Lagrange multipliers related to the
KL and entropy constraints respectively and minimizing
the dual function gn (η, ω). We refer the reader to Sec. 2.1
in (Abdolmaleki et al., 2015) for the definition of gn (η, ω).
When the entropy constraint is the inequality in (2) instead
of an equality, the Lagrange multipliers for our update and
the MORE update may differ. However, η ? and ω ? can still
be obtained by the minimization of the same gn (η, ω) with
the additional constraint ω ≥ 1.
Note that the new search distribution πn+1 as defined in
Eq. (7) is not necessarily Gaussian because of the multiplication by p?n . However, by approximating p?n by a Gaussian
distribution pbn , log pbn will be a quadratic model and Eq. 5
and 6 can be used to obtain a Gaussian πn+1 .
3.2. Approximating the argmax distribution
To obtain a closed form update of the Gaussian search distribution in Eq. (7), we will approximate p?n by fitting a
Gaussian pbn to samples of p?n as shown in Fig. 1e. To
generate samples from p?n , we use Thompson sampling
(Chapelle & Li, 2011; Russo & Roy, 2014) from a probabilistic model of the objective function f .
The probabilistic model of f follows from both a Gaussian process (GP) prior and a Gaussian likelihood assumption. We use in this paper the squared exponential kernel
kn (xi , xj ) = θ0 exp(−θ1 (xi − xj )T Σ−1
n (xi − xj )) with
hyper-parameters θ0 and θ1 and Σn the covariance matrix
of πn . The resulting model has hyper-parameter vector
φ = (θ0 , θ1 , σs ), where σs2 is the noise variance of the
likelihood function as previously defined. Samples from
p?n are generated by i) sampling a hyper-parameter vector φ from the posterior distribution p(φ|Dn ) using slice
sampling (Murray & Adams, 2010), ii) sampling a function from the GP posterior p(fe|Dn , φ) and iii) returning
the argmax of fe.
The computational complexity of evaluating fe is cubical in
the number of requested evaluations as it involves a matrix
inversion. As such, the exact maximization of fe can prove
to be challenging. Prior work in the literature considered
approximating fe with a linear function (see for example
Hernández-Lobato et al. (2014), Sec. 2.1) and globally

maximizing the linear surrogate. In our local optimization context, we follow a more straightforward approach
by generating samples from πn , and returning the sample
with maximal value of fe. The rational behind searching
the argmax of fe in the vicinity of πn is that samples from
πn are likely to have high fe value since πn is updated such
that the KL divergence w.r.t. p?n is minimized. The repeated process of drawing points from πn , drawing their
value from the GP posterior and selecting the point with
highest value will constitute a data set Dn? containing local
samples from p?n .
Once samples from p?n are generated and stored in Dn? , we
set pbn = N (µ?n , Σ?n ) where µ?n and Σ?n are the sample
mean and covariance of the samples in Dn? . Because pbn
is Gaussian, log pbn is quadratic and the search distribution
update in Eq. (7) yields a Gaussian distribution πn+1 with
covariance and mean as defined in Eq. (5) and Eq. (6) respectively with Rn = Σ?n −1 and r n = Σ?n −1 µ?n .
3.3. Sample generation
The function f is initially evaluated at a point x0 drawn
from the prior distribution π0 . In subsequent iterations, a
point xn is randomly selected from Dn? , the set of samples
used in the computation of pbn (Sec. 3.2).
Experimentally, we noticed that the exploration in our algorithm is heavily influenced by the centering of the values
{yi }n1 in Dn . Three variants of our algorithm are initially
evaluated with different target values of the GP. The target
values are obtained by subtracting from yi either the max
the min or the mean of {yi }n1 . Since the GP modeling of
f has a zero mean prior, the extreme case where the max
(resp. the min) is subtracted from the data results in an optimistic (resp. pessimistic) exploration strategy considering
that the objective function in unexplored areas have values higher (resp. lower) in expectation than the best (resp.
worst) evaluation so far.

4. Experiments
We initially investigate in this section the impact of the
target centering (Sec. 3.3) on the exploration-exploitation
trade-off of our algorithm. We then compare our algorithm to two state-of-the-art model based optimizers: the
global Bayesian optimizer and the local Model-Based Relative Entropy Search (Abdolmaleki et al., 2015). The algorithms are compared on several continuous function benchmarks as well as a simulated robotics task.
Benchmarks. Variants of our algorithm are first compared
on randomly generated smooth 2 dimensional objective
functions. We then conduct a comparison to the state-ofthe-art on the COmparing COntinuous optimisers (COCO)

Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills

testbed on the 20 functions f 5 to f 24 (we refer the reader to
http://coco.gforge.inria.fr/ for an illustration and the mathematical definition of each function). We
chose to split the experimentation between the uni-modal
and the multi-modal categories of the testbed. The unimodal category is representative of the informed initialization hypothesis that only requires local improvements.
While the multi-modal category assesses the robustness
of our algorithm to more complex function landscapes—
which can be encountered in practice despite the informed
initialization if e.g. a too wide variance σ02 is initially set.
We vary the dimension of the COCO functions from 3 to
30 while the robotics task evaluates our algorithm on a 70
dimensional setting.
Algorithms. In what follows, we will refer to our algorithm as L-BayesOpt. We rely on the GPStuff library (Vanhatalo et al., 2013) for the GP implementation and the posterior sampling of hyper-parameters. We use the BayesOpt
library (Martinez-Cantin, 2014) for global Bayesian optimization with a similar to L-BayesOpt squared exponential kernel and MCMC sampling of hyper-parameters and
an additional Automatic Relevance Determination step executed every 50 samples. In the experiments we evaluate
BayesOpt with both Expected Improvement and Thompson Sampling acquisition functions.
In all of the experiments, L-BayesOpt and MORE will
share the same initial policy, step-size , entropy reduction β and will sample ten points per iteration. We choose
to use an equality constraint for the entropy reduction for
both algorithms. As a result, both L-BayesOpt and MORE
will have the same entropy at every iteration and any difference in performance will be attributed to a better location of the mean, adaptation of the covariance matrix or
sampling procedure rather than a faster reduction in exploration. In all but the last experiment  = β = .05 while for
the robotics experiment with an initial solution learned by
imitation learning we set a more aggressive step size and
entropy reduction  = β = 1.
Evaluation criterion. The performance metric in RL
is
R typically given by the average return J(πn ) =
πn (x)f (x)dx while in Bayesian optimization it is typically determined by the minimal evaluation min1≤i≤n yi
reached at iteration n. When the evaluations are noisy the
minimum evaluation is not a robust performance metric—
nor an appropriate criterion for the algorithm to select the
returned optimizer. In order to have a common evaluation
criterion, all the approaches are seen as multi-armed
P bandit
algorithms and we use the cumulative regret n1 i f (x? )−
yi as the evaluation criterion. The cumulative regret of
(global) Bayesian optimizers is expected to be asymptotically lower than that of local optimizers as it always finds
the global maximum given sufficiently many evaluations.

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-10

-5

0

5

10

(a) Sample objective function.

(b) Cumulative regret.

Figure 2. Three variants of L-BayesOpt (Sec. 3.3) and MORE
evaluated on 11 randomly generated objective functions. The min
variant results in a contained exploration and has the lowest cumulative regret during the first 500 function evaluations.

Conversely, trading-off global optimality for fast local improvements might result in a lower regret for local optimizers when the evaluation budget is moderate.
4.1. Exploration variants
In this first set of experiments, we evaluate the different exploration strategies resulting from three different centering
methods of the y values in Dn . We compare these three
variants of L-BayesOpt on 11 randomly generated two dimensional Gaussian mixture objective functions (see Fig.
2a for an illustration). We chose these functions as they
are cheap to evaluate, easy to approximate by a GP and
their multi-modal nature is appropriate for evaluating the
exploration-exploitation trade-off of the three variants.
As hypothesized in Sec. 3.3, the cumulative regret in Fig.
2b shows that the min variant exhibits the lowest exploration and reduces the regret faster than the other optimizers. Yet, when compared to MORE it manages to converge
to better local optima in 5 out of the 11 randomly generated
objectives while MORE converges to a better optimum in
one of the 6 remaining objectives. Note that MORE manages to decrease the regret faster than our algorithm during
the first 100 evaluations. However, the sampling scheme relying on the Thompson sampling acquisition function and
the convergence to higher modes gives the advantage to the
L-BayesOpt variants after the initial 100 evaluations. In the
remainder of the experimental section only the min variant
of our algorithm will be considered.
4.2. State-of-the-art benchmark comparisons
We compare our algorithm to MORE and Bayesian optimization on the COCO testbed. We form two sets each containing 10 objective functions. The first one includes unimodal functions (f 5 to f 14) while the second one includes
multi-modal function with an adequate (f 15 to f 19) and a
weak (f 20 to f 24) global structure. Each function has a
global optimum in [−5, 5]D , where D is the dimension of
the objective function that we vary in the set {3, 10, 30}.

Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills

(a) Multi-modal objectives, dim = 3.

(b) Multi-modal objectives, dim = 10.

(c) Multi-modal objectives, dim = 30.

(d) Uni-modal objectives, dim = 3.

(e) Uni-modal objectives, dim = 10.

(f) Uni-modal objectives, dim = 30.

Figure 3. Evaluation on uni-modal and multi-modal functions of varying dimension of the COCO testbed of four algorithms: LBayesOpt, MORE and global Bayesian optimization using either Expected Improvement (EI) or Thompson Sampling (TS) acquisition
function. Bayesian optimization is a global optimizer and its combination with Thompson sampling is as such a zero regret algorithm.
However, when evaluation budget is moderate (≤ 500), the local optimization performed by L-BayesOpt yields faster improvements
than Bayesian optimization when the objective function is uni-modal or when the dimensionality of the problem increases.

The bounding box [−5, 5]D is provided to Bayesian optimization while for the local stochastic search algorithms
we set the initial distribution to π0 = N (0, 3I). Note that
this is not an informed initialization and none of the functions had their optimum on the null vector.
Fig. 3 shows the performance of the four algorithms on the
multi-modal (top row) and uni-modal (bottom row) function sets. On the multi-modal set of functions and when
D = 3, Bayesian optimization with Thompson sampling
proves to be an extremely efficient bandit algorithm for
uncovering the highest reward point with a minimal number of evaluations. On the contrary, both local stochastic
search algorithms struggle to improve over the initial performance. Upon closer inspection, this appears to be especially true for functions with weak global structure such
as f 23. We hypothesize that for these highly multi-modal
functions, both model based stochastic search algorithms
learn poor quadratic models (when either approximating f
or p?n ). The performance gap between Bayesian optimization and our algorithm reduces however as the dimensionality of the problem increases.
On the uni-modal functions set, our algorithm reduces significantly faster the regret than Bayesian optimization. As

the dimension of the objective function increases from
D = 10 to D = 30, more evaluations are required by
Bayesian optimization to reach our algorithm. Compared
to MORE, and since the objectives are uni-modal, the use
of an acquisition function is the main driving factor for the
faster decrease of the regret. Note that even if the functions
are uni-modal, both local search algorithms are not necessarily zero if the decrease in entropy is too fast.
Both L-BayesOpt and BayesOpt/TS rely on the Thompson
sampling acquisition function for selecting the next point
to evaluate. While the acquisition function is maximized
on the full support of the objective in the case of Bayesian
optimization, it is only optimized in the vicinity of the current search distribution by our algorithm. The experiments
on the COCO testbed show that when the function landscape enables the learning of an appropriate update direction for moving the search distribution, the adaptive strategy employed by our algorithm can be more efficient than
the global search performed by Bayesian optimization.
4.3. Robot ball in the cup
The task’s objective is for the Barrett robot arm to swing
the ball upward and place it in the cup (Fig. 4a). The

Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills

(a) Robot ball in a cup.

(b) Cumulative regret.

Figure 4. L-BayesOpt and MORE locally optimizing an imitation
learning policy. The 7 DoF robot is controlled by a 70 parameters
policy. L-BayesOpt is initially slower but is better at fine-tuning
the policy later on. Plots are averaged over 5 runs.

optimization is performed on the 70 weights of the forcing function of a Dynamical Movement Primitive (DMP,
Ijspeert & Schaal 2003) controlling the 7 joints of the robot.
The initial forcing function weights µ0 are learned by linear regression from a single demonstrated trajectory that
successfully swings the ball up but where the ball lands at
circa 20cm from the cup. We compare the performance
of MORE and L-BayesOpt in optimizing the initial policy π0 = N (µ0 , I) using the same hyper-parameters. The
challenge of the task, in addition to the dimension of the
action space, stems from the two exploration regimes required by the exploration scheme. While initially a significant amount of noise needs to be introduced to the parameters to get the ball closer to the cup; successfully getting the
ball in the cup requires a more careful tuning of the forcing
function.
Fig. 4b shows the performance of both MORE and LBayesOpt on the robot ball in a cup task. MORE has a
better initial sample efficiency and gets the ball closer to
the cup at a faster pace than L-BayesOpt. However, the acquisition function based sampling scheme of our algorithm
was more efficient for discovering parameters that successfully put the ball in the cup and results in a lower regret (averaged over 5 runs) after 1000 evaluations. The experiment
shows that for such high dimensional tasks, our algorithm
was better at tuning the policy only when the entropy of the
search distribution was significantly reduced. This might
be due to the low correlation between Euclidean distance
between parameters and difference in reward. One promising direction for future work in a reinforcement learning
context is to use kernels based on trajectory data distance
instead of parameter distance in euclidian space (Wilson
et al., 2014).

5. Discussion
The algorithm presented in this paper can be seen as
Bayesian optimization where the usual box constraint is rotated, shrunk and moved at each iteration towards the most

promising region of the objective function. The constant
reduction of the entropy of the search distribution ensures
that the objective function is not modeled and optimized on
the entirety of its domain. Compared to (global) Bayesian
optimization, we experimentally demonstrated on several
continuous optimization benchmarks that it results in faster
improvements over the initial solution, at the expense of
global optimality. This property is especially useful when
an initial informative solution is available and only requires
to be locally improved.
The computational cost of the search distribution update
in our algorithm is significantly higher than most local
stochastic search algorithms. This cost mainly arises from
the full Bayesian treatment of the modeling of the objective
function f . If the evaluation of f is cheap, a better performance per second is obtained by less expensive stochastic
search algorithms where the additional computational budget can be spent in running additional randomized restarts
of the algorithms (Auger & Hansen, 2005). However, if the
optimization cost is dominated by the evaluation of f , the
probabilistic modeling proved to be more sample efficient
on several benchmarks by actively selecting the next point
to evaluate. As a result, when f is expensive to evaluate
our algorithm is expected to have better per second performance than state-of-the-art stochastic search algorithms.
The search distribution update proposed in this paper is
well founded and results in an interpretable update. At each
iteration the current search distribution is simply weighted
by p(x = x? |Dn ), the probability of x being optimal
according to the current data set. Future work can further improve the sample efficiency of our algorithm in at
least three ways. First, if the objective function is upper
bounded and the bound is known, we expect that the integration of an additional constraint f (x) < f (x∗ ) for all x
to lead to a more accurate probabilistic modeling and a better exploration-exploitation trade-off. Secondly, the search
distribution update is phrased as the minimization of the
I-projection of p(x = x? |Dn ), which has the property of
focusing on one mode of the distribution (Bishop, 2006).
However, the Gaussian approximation of p(x = x? |Dn )
can average over multiple modes if the GP is unsure about
which of them is the highest. We expected that a better update direction can be obtained if a clustering algorithm can
detect the highest mode from samples of p(x = x? |Dn ).
Finally and perharps most interestingly, we expect our algorithm to be able to scale to significantly higher dimensional policies in an RL setting if a trajectory data kernel is
used (Wilson et al., 2014). Specifically, distance between
policies can be measured by the similarity of actions taken
in similar states. The local nature of our algorithm will additionally ensure that such similarity is evaluated on states
that are likely to be reached by the evaluated policies.

Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills

Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results was funded by
the DFG Project LearnRobotS under the SPP 1527 Autonomous Learning.

References
Abdolmaleki, Abbas, Lioutikov, Rudolf, Peters, Jan R,
Lau, Nuno, Pualo Reis, Luis, and Neumann, Gerhard. Model-based relative entropy stochastic search.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), pp. 3523–3531. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015.
Argall, Brenna, Chernova, Sonia, Veloso, Manuela M.,
and Browning, Brett. A survey of robot learning from
demonstration. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 57
(5):469–483, 2009.
Auger, Anne and Hansen, Nikolaus. A restart cma evolution strategy with increasing population size. In IEEE
Congress on Evolutionary Computation, volume 2, pp.
1769–1776. IEEE, 2005.
Bergstra, James, Bardenet, Rémi, Bengio, Yoshua, and
Kégl, Balázs. Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 2546–2554, 2011.
Berkenkamp, Felix, Schoellig, Angela P, and Krause, Andreas. Safe controller optimization for quadrotors with
gaussian processes. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
2016 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 491–496.
IEEE, 2016.
Bishop, Christopher M. Pattern Recognition and Machine
Learning. Springer-Verlag New York, 2006.
Brochu, Eric, de Freitas, Nando, and Ghosh, Abhijeet.
Active preference learning with discrete choice data.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), pp. 409–416, 2007.
Brochu, Eric, Cora, Vlad M., and de Freitas, Nando. A
tutorial on bayesian optimization of expensive cost functions, with application to active user modeling and hierarchical reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1012.2599,
2010.
Bull, A. D. Convergence rates of efficient global optimization algorithms. 12:2879–2904, 2011.
Calandra, Roberto, Seyfarth, André, Peters, Jan, and
Deisenroth, Marc Peter. Bayesian optimization for learning gaits under uncertainty - an experimental comparison
on a dynamic bipedal walker. Ann. Math. Artif. Intell.,
76(1-2):5–23, 2016.

Chapelle, Olivier and Li, Lihong. An empirical evaluation
of thompson sampling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 2249–2257. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2011.
Deisenroth, M. and Rasmussen, C. PILCO: A ModelBased and Data-Efficient Approach to Policy Search. In
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
pp. 465–472, 2011.
Djolonga, Josip, Krause, Andreas, and Cevher, Volkan.
High-dimensional gaussian process bandits. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp.
1025–1033, 2013.
Englert, Peter and Toussaint, Marc. Combined optimization and reinforcement learning for manipulations skills.
In Robotics:Science and Systems 2016, 2016.
Feurer, Matthias, Klein, Aaron, Eggensperger, Katharina,
Springenberg, Jost Tobias, Blum, Manuel, and Hutter,
Frank. Efficient and robust automated machine learning.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), pp. 2962–2970, 2015.
Ghavamzadeh, Mohammad, Engel, Yaakov, and Valko,
Michal. Bayesian policy gradient and actor-critic algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(66):
1–53, 2016.
Hansen, Nikolaus and Ostermeier, Andreas. Completely
derandomized self-adaptation in evolution strategies.
Evolutionary Computation, 9(2):159–195, 2001.
Hernández-Lobato, José Miguel, Hoffman, Matthew W.,
and Ghahramani, Zoubin. Predictive entropy search
for efficient global optimization of black-box functions.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), pp. 918–926, 2014.
Ijspeert, A. and Schaal, S. Learning Attractor Landscapes
for Learning Motor Primitives. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 15, (NIPS). MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 2003.
Jones, Donald R. A taxonomy of global optimization methods based on response surfaces. J. Global Optimization,
21(4):345–383, 2001.
Kandasamy, Kirthevasan, Schneider, Jeff G., and Póczos,
Barnabás. High dimensional bayesian optimisation and
bandits via additive models. In International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 295–304, 2015.
Kober, J., Bagnell, J. Andrew, and Peters, J. Reinforcement
learning in robotics: A survey. International Journal of
Robotics Research, July 2013.

Local Bayesian Optimization of Motor Skills

Li, Chun-Liang, Kandasamy, Kirthevasan, Póczos,
Barnabás, and Schneider, Jeff G. High dimensional
bayesian optimization via restricted projection pursuit
models. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS
2016, Cadiz, Spain, May 9-11, 2016, pp. 884–892, 2016.
Lizotte, Daniel J., Wang, Tao, Bowling, Michael H., and
Schuurmans, Dale. Automatic gait optimization with
gaussian process regression. In IJCAI 2007, Proceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Hyderabad, India, January 6-12, 2007,
pp. 944–949, 2007.
Loshchilov, Ilya, Schoenauer, Marc, and Sebag, Michèle.
Bi-population CMA-ES agorithms with surrogate models and line searches. In Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference, GECCO ’13, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, July 6-10, 2013, Companion Material Proceedings, pp. 1177–1184, 2013.
Mannor, Shie, Rubinstein, Reuven, and Gat, Yohai. The
Cross Entropy method for Fast Policy Search. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Machine Learning, (ICML 2003), pp. 512–519, Washington, DC, USA, 2003.
Martinez-Cantin, Ruben. Bayesopt: A bayesian optimization library for nonlinear optimization, experimental design and bandits. Journal of Machine Learning Research
(JMLR), 15(1):3735–3739, January 2014. ISSN 15324435.
Mnih, Volodymyr, Kavukcuoglu, Koray, Silver, David,
Rusu, Andrei A., Veness, Joel, Bellemare, Marc G.,
Graves, Alex, Riedmiller, Martin, Fidjeland, Andreas K.,
Ostrovski, Georg, Petersen, Stig, Beattie, Charles, Sadik,
Amir, Antonoglou, Ioannis, King, Helen, Kumaran,
Dharshan, Wierstra, Daan, Legg, Shane, and Hassabis,
Demis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 02 2015.
Murray, Iain and Adams, Ryan P. Slice sampling covariance hyperparameters of latent gaussian models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), pp. 1732–1740, 2010.
Peters, J., Mülling, K., and Altun, Y. Relative Entropy Policy Search. In Proceedings of the 24th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI). AAAI Press,
2010.
Russo, Daniel and Roy, Benjamin Van. Learning to optimize via posterior sampling. Math. Oper. Res., 39(4):
1221–1243, 2014.

Schulman, John, Levine, Sergey, Jordan, Michael, and
Abbeel, Pieter. Trust Region Policy Optimization. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
16, 2015.
Shahriari, Bobak, Swersky, Kevin, Wang, Ziyu, Adams,
Ryan P., and de Freitas, Nando. Taking the human out of
the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1):148–175, 2016.
Silver, David, Huang, Aja, Maddison, Chris J., Guez,
Arthur, Sifre, Laurent, van den Driessche, George,
Schrittwieser, Julian, Antonoglou, Ioannis, Panneershelvam, Veda, Lanctot, Marc, Dieleman, Sander,
Grewe, Dominik, Nham, John, Kalchbrenner, Nal,
Sutskever, Ilya, Lillicrap, Timothy, Leach, Madeleine,
Kavukcuoglu, Koray, Graepel, Thore, and Hassabis,
Demis. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, January 2016.
Snoek, Jasper, Larochelle, Hugo, and Adams, Ryan P.
Practical bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS), pp. 2960–2968, 2012.
Snoek, Jasper, Swersky, Kevin, Zemel, Richard S., and
Adams, Ryan P. Input warping for bayesian optimization
of non-stationary functions. In International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1674–1682, 2014.
Thomas, Philip S., Theocharous, Georgios, and
Ghavamzadeh, Mohammad.
High confidence policy improvement.
In International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2380–2388, 2015.
Vanhatalo, Jarno, Riihimäki, Jaakko, Hartikainen, Jouni,
Jylänki, Pasi, Tolvanen, Ville, and Vehtari, Aki. Gpstuff:
Bayesian modeling with gaussian processes. Journal of
Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 14(1):1175–1179,
April 2013. ISSN 1532-4435.
Vazquez, E. and Bect, J. Convergence properties of the
expected improvement algorithm with fixed mean and
covariance functions. J. of Statistical Planning and Inference, 140:3088–3095, 2010.
Wang, Ziyu, Hutter, Frank, Zoghi, Masrour, Matheson,
David, and de Freitas, Nando. Bayesian optimization
in a billion dimensions via random embeddings. J. Artif.
Intell. Res. (JAIR), 55:361–387, 2016.
Wilson, Aaron, Fern, Alan, and Tadepalli, Prasad. Using
trajectory data to improve bayesian optimization for reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):253–282, 2014.

