The Shattered Gradients Problem:
If resnets are the answer, then what is the question?
David Balduzzi 1 Marcus Frean 1 Lennox Leary 1 JP Lewis 1 2 Kurt Wan-Duo Ma 1 Brian McWilliams 3

Abstract
A long-standing obstacle to progress in deep
learning is the problem of vanishing and exploding gradients. Although, the problem has
largely been overcome via carefully constructed
initializations and batch normalization, architectures incorporating skip-connections such as
highway and resnets perform much better than
standard feedforward architectures despite wellchosen initialization and batch normalization. In
this paper, we identify the shattered gradients
problem. Specifically, we show that the correlation between gradients in standard feedforward networks decays exponentially with depth
resulting in gradients that resemble white noise
whereas, in contrast, the gradients in architectures with skip-connections are far more resistant to shattering, decaying sublinearly. Detailed
empirical evidence is presented in support of the
analysis, on both fully-connected networks and
convnets. Finally, we present a new “looks linear” (LL) initialization that prevents shattering,
with preliminary experiments showing the new
initialization allows to train very deep networks
without the addition of skip-connections.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved outstanding performance (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015; He
et al., 2016b). Reducing the tendency of gradients to vanish or explode with depth (Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio et al.,
1994) has been essential to this progress.
Combining careful initialization (Glorot & Bengio, 2010;
*

1
Equal contribution
Victoria University of Welling2
ton, New Zealand SEED, Electronic Arts 3 Disney Research, Zürich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: David
Balduzzi <dbalduzzi@gmail.com>,
Brian McWilliams
<brian@disneyresearch.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

He et al., 2015) with batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015) bakes two solutions to the vanishing/exploding gradient problem into a single architecture. The He initialization ensures variance is preserved across rectifier layers, and batch normalization ensures that backpropagation
through layers is unaffected by the scale of the weights
(Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015).
It is perhaps surprising then that residual networks (resnets)
still perform so much better than standard architectures
when networks are sufficiently deep (He et al., 2016a;b).
This raises the question: If resnets are the solution, then
what is the problem? We identify the shattered gradient
problem: a previously unnoticed difficulty with gradients
in deep rectifier networks that is orthogonal to vanishing
and exploding gradients. The shattering gradients problem
is that, as depth increases, gradients in standard feedforward networks increasingly resemble white noise. Resnets
dramatically reduce the tendency of gradients to shatter.
Our analysis applies at initialization. Shattering should decrease during training. Understanding how shattering affects training is an important open problem.
Terminology. We refer to networks without skip connections as feedforward nets—in contrast to residual nets
(resnets) and highway nets. We distinguish between the
real-valued output of a rectifier and its binary activation:
the activation is 1 if the output is positive and 0 otherwise.
1.1. The Shattered Gradients Problem
The first step is to simply look at the gradients of neural networks. Gradients are averaged over minibatches, depend
on both the loss and the random sample from the data, and
are extremely high-dimensional, which introduces multiple
confounding factors and makes visualization difficult (but
see section 4). We therefore construct a minimal model
designed to eliminate these confounding factors. The minimal model is a neural network fW : R ! R taking scalars
to scalars; each hidden layer contains N = 200 rectifier
neurons. The model is not intended to be applied to real
data. Rather, it is a laboratory where gradients can be isolated and investigated.
We are interested in how the gradient varies, at initializa-

Covariance matrices

Noise

Gradients

The Shattered Gradients Problem

(a) 1-layer feedforward. (b) 24-layer feedforward.

(c) 50-layer resnet.

(d) Brown noise.

(e) White noise.

Figure 1: Comparison between noise and gradients of rectifier nets with 200 neurons per hidden layer. Columns
d–e: brown and white noise. Columns a–c: Gradients of neural nets plotted for inputs taken from a uniform grid. The
24-layer net uses mean-centering. The 50-layer net uses batch normalization with = 0.1, see Eq. (2).
tion, as a function of the input:
dfW (i)
(x )
dx

where x(i) 2 [ 2, 2] is in a

(1)

1-dim grid of M = 256 “data points”.
Updates during training depend on derivatives with respect
to weights, not inputs. Our results are relevant because, by
@fW
W @nj
the chain rule, @w
= @f
@nj @wij . Weight updates thus deij
W
pend on @f
@nj —i.e. how the output of the network varies
with the output of neurons in one layer (which are just inputs to the next layer).
W
The top row of figure 1 plots dfdx
(x(i) ) for each point x(i)
in the 1-dim grid. The bottom row shows the (absolute
value) of the covariance matrix: |(g ḡ)(g ḡ)> |/ g2
where g is the 256-vector of gradients, ḡ the mean, and g2
the variance.

If all the neurons were linear then the gradient would be
a horizontal line (i.e. the gradient would be constant as a
function of x). Rectifiers are not smooth, so the gradients
are discontinuous.
Gradients of shallow networks resemble brown noise.
Suppose the network has a single hidden layer: fw,b (x) =
w> ⇢(x · v
b). Following Glorot & Bengio (2010),
weights w and biases b are sampled from N (0, 2 ) with
2
= N1 . Set v = (1, . . . , 1).
Figure 1a shows the gradient of the network for inputs
x 2 [ 2, 2] and its covariance matrix. Figure 1d shows
aPdiscrete approximation to brownian motion: B N (t) =
t
1
s=1 Ws where Ws ⇠ N (0, N ). The plots are strikingly
similar: both clearly exhibit spatial covariance structure.
The resemblance is not coincidental: section A1 applies

Donsker’s theorem to show the gradient converges to brownian motion as N ! 1.
Gradients of deep networks resemble white noise. Figure 1b shows the gradient of a 24-layer fully-connected rectifier network. Figure 1e shows white noise given by samples Wk ⇠ N (0, 1). Again, the plots are strikingly similar.
Since the inputs lie on a 1-dim grid, it makes sense to
compute the autocorrelation function (ACF) of the gradient. Figures 2a and 2d compare this function for feedforward networks of different depth with white and brown
noise. The ACF for shallow networks resembles the ACF
of brown noise. As the network gets deeper, the ACF
quickly comes to resemble that of white noise.
Theorem 1 explains this phenomenon. We show that correlations between gradients decrease exponentially 21L with
depth in feedforward rectifier networks.
Training is difficult when gradients behave like white
noise. The shattered gradient problem is that the spatial
structure of gradients is progressively obliterated as neural
nets deepen. The problem is clearly visible when inputs
are taken from a one-dimensional grid, but is difficult to
observe when inputs are randomly sampled from a highdimensional dataset.
Shattered gradients undermine the effectiveness of algorithms that assume gradients at nearby points are similar such as momentum-based and accelerated methods
W
(Sutskever et al., 2013; Balduzzi et al., 2017). If df
dnj behaves like white noise, then a neuron’s effect on the output
of the network (whether increasing weights causes the network to output more or less) becomes extremely unstable

The Shattered Gradients Problem
1

Depth
2
4
10
24
50

0

0.5

0

5

10

Lag

(a) Feedforward nets.

1

15

Autocorrelation

Autocorrelation

0.5

1

Brown noise
White noise
Autocorrelation

Autocorrelation

1

0.5

0

5

10

Lag

(b) Resnets ( = 1.0).

15

0.5

0

5

10

Lag

(c) Resnets ( = 0.1).

15

5

10

15

Lag

(d) White and brown noise.

Figure 2: Autocorrelation Function (ACF). Comparison of the ACF between white and brown noise, and feedforward
and resnets of different depths. Average over 20 runs.
making learning difficult.

gradients over minibatches to decrease with depth (relative
to the average variance of gradients).

Gradients of deep resnets lie in between brown and
white noise. Introducing skip-connections allows much
deeper networks to be trained (Srivastava et al., 2015; He
et al., 2016b;a; Greff et al., 2017). Skip-connections significantly change the correlation structure of gradients. Figure 1c shows the concrete example of a 50-layer resnet
which has markedly more structure than the equivalent
feedforward net (figure 1b). Figure 2b shows the ACF of
resnets of different depths. Although the gradients become
progressively less structured, they do not whiten to the extent of the gradients in standard feedforward networks—
there are still correlations in the 50-layer resnet whereas in
the equivalent feedforward net, the gradients are indistinguishable from white noise. Figure 2c shows the dramatic
effect of recently proposed -rescaling (Szegedy et al.,
2016): the ACF of even the 50 layer network resemble
brown-noise.

Finally, section 5 proposes the LL-init (“looks linear initialization”) which eliminates shattering. Preliminary experiments show the LL-init allows training of extremely deep
networks (⇠200 layers) without skip-connections.

Theorem 3 shows that correlations between gradients decay
sublinearly with depth p1L for resnets with batch normalization. We also show, corollary 1, that modified highway
networks (where the gates are scalars) can achieve a depth
independent correlation structure on gradients. The analysis explains why skip-connections, combined with suitable
rescaling, preserve the structure of gradients.
1.2. Outline
Section 2 shows that batch normalization increases neural
efficiency. We explore how batch normalization behaves
differently in feedforward and resnets, and draw out facts
that are relevant to the main results.
The main results are in section 3. They explain why gradients shatter and how skip-connections reduce shattering. The proofs are for a mathematically amenable model:
fully-connected rectifier networks with the same number of
hidden neurons in each layer. Section 4 presents empirical
results which show gradients similarly shatter in convnets
for real data. It also shows that shattering causes average

1.3. Related work
Carefully initializing neural networks has led to a series
of performance breakthroughs dating back (at least) to the
unsupervised pretraining in Hinton et al. (2006); Bengio
et al. (2006). The insight of Glorot & Bengio (2010) is
that controlling the variance of the distributions from which
weights are sampled allows to control how layers progressively amplify or dampen the variance of activations and
error signals. More recently, He et al. (2015) refined the
approach to take rectifiers into account. Rectifiers effectively halve the variance since, at initialization and on average, they are active for half their inputs. Orthogonalizing
weight matrices can yield further improvements albeit at a
computational cost (Saxe et al., 2014; Mishkin & Matas,
2016). The observation that the norms of weights form a
random walk was used by Sussillo & Abbott (2015) to tune
the gains of neurons.
In short, it has proven useful to treat weights and gradients
as random variables, and carefully examine their effect on
the variance of the signals propagated through the network.
This paper presents a more detailed analysis that considers
correlations between gradients at different datapoints.
The closest work to ours is Veit et al. (2016), which shows
resnets behave like ensembles of shallow networks. We
provide a more detailed analysis of the effect of skipconnections on gradients. A recent paper showed resnets
have universal finite-sample expressivity and may lack spurious local optima (Hardt & Ma, 2017) but does not explain
why deep feedforward nets are harder to train than resnets.
An interesting hypothesis is that skip-connections improve
performance by breaking symmetries (Orhan, 2017).

The Shattered Gradients Problem

The increased efficiency comes at a price. The raster plot
for feedforward networks resembles static television noise:
the spatial structure is obliterated. Resnets (Figure 4c) exhibit a compromise where neurons are utilized efficiently
but the spatial structure is also somewhat preserved. The
preservation of spatial structure is quantified via the contiguity histograms which counts long runs of consistent activation. Resnets maintain a broad distribution of contiguity
even with deep networks whereas batch normalization on
feedforward nets shatters these into small sections.

Figure 3: Activations and coactivations in feedforward
networks. Plots are averaged over 100 fully connected rectifier networks with 100 hidden units per layer. Without
BN: solid. With BN: dotted. Activations (green): Proportion of inputs for which neurons in a given layer are active,
on average. Coactivations (blue): Proportion of distinct
pairs of inputs for which neurons are active, on average.

2. Observations on batch normalization
Batch normalization was introduced to reduce covariate
shift (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). However, it has other effects that are less well-known – and directly impact the
correlation structure of gradients. We investigate the effect
of batch normalization on neuronal activity at initialization
(i.e. when it mean-centers and rescales to unit variance).
We first investigate batch normalization’s effect on neural
activations. Neurons are active for half their inputs on average, figure 3, with or without batch normalization. Figure 3
also shows how often neurons are co-active for two inputs.
With batch normalization, neurons are co-active for 14 of
distinct pairs of inputs, which is what would happen if activations were decided by unbiased coin flips. Without batch
normalization, the co-active proportion climbs with depth,
suggesting neuronal responses are increasingly redundant.
Resnets with batch normalization behave the same as feedforward nets (not shown).
Figure 4 takes a closer look. It turns out that computing the
proportion of inputs causing neurons to be active on average is misleading. The distribution becomes increasingly
bimodal with depth. In particular, neurons are either always
active or always inactive for layer 50 in the feedforward net
without batch normalization (blue histogram in figure 4a).
Batch normalization causes most neurons to be active for
half the inputs, blue histograms in figures 4b,c.
Neurons that are always active may as well be linear. Neurons that are always inactive may as well not exist. It follows that batch normalization increases the efficiency with
which rectifier nonlinearities are utilized.

3. Analysis
This section analyzes the correlation structure of gradients
in neural nets at initialization. The main ideas and results
are presented; the details provided in section A3.
Perhaps the simplest way to probe the structure of a random process is to measure the first few moments: the mean,
variance and covariance. We investigate how the correlation between typical datapoints (defined below) changes
with network structure and depth. Weaker correlations
correspond to whiter gradients. The analysis is for fullyconnected networks. Extending to convnets involves (significant) additional bookkeeping.
Proof strategy. The covariance defines an inner product
on the vector space of real-valued random variables with
mean zero and finite second moment. It was shown in Balduzzi et al. (2015); Balduzzi (2016) that the gradients in
neural nets are sums of path-weights over active paths, see
section A3. The first step is to observe that path-weights are
orthogonal with respect to the variance inner product. To
express gradients as linear combinations of path-weights is
thus to express them over an orthogonal basis.
Working in the path-weight basis reduces computing the
covariance between gradients at different datapoints to
counting the number of co-active paths through the network. The second step is to count co-active paths and adjust
for rescaling factors (e.g. due to batch normalization).
The following assumption is crucial to the analysis:
Assumption 1 (typical datapoints). We say x(i) and x(j)
are typical datapoints if half of neurons per layer are active
for each and a quarter per layer are co-active for both. We
assume all pairs of datapoints are typical.
The assumption will not hold for every pair of datapoints.
Figure 3 shows the assumption holds, on average, under
batch normalization for both activations and coactivations.
The initialization in He et al. (2015) assumes datapoints
activate half the neurons per layer. The assumption on
co-activations is implied by (and so weaker than) the assumption in Choromanska et al. (2015) that activations are
Bernoulli random variables independent of the inputs.

Depth 50

Depth 10

Depth 2

The Shattered Gradients Problem

(a) Feedforward net without batch norm.

(b) Feedforward with batch normalization.

(c) Resnet with batch normalization.

Figure 4: Activation of rectifiers in deep networks. Raster-plots: Activations of hidden units (y-axis) for inputs
indexed by the x-axis. Left histogram (activation per unit): distribution of average activation levels per neuron. Right
histogram (contiguity): distribution of “contiguity” (length of contiguous sequences of 0 or 1) along rows in the raster plot.
Correlations between gradients.
neural network are proportional to
wjk /

Weight updates in a

b) The covariance is C fnn (i, j) =

#mb
P
XX
i=1

@` @fp @nk (i)
x .
@fp @nk @wjk
p=1

where fp is the pth coordinate of the output of the network
@`
and nk is the output of the k th neuron. The derivatives @f
p
and

@nk
@wjk

do not depend on the network’s internal struc@f

ture. We are interested in the middle term @npk , which
does.
PP It is mathematically convenient to work with the sum
p=1 fp over output coordinates of the network. Section 4
shows that our results hold for convnets on real-data with
the cross-entropy loss. See also remark A2.
PP @fp (i)
Definition 1. Let ri :=
p=1 @n (x ) be the derivative with respect to neuron n given input x(i) 2 D. For
each input x(i) , the derivative ri is a real-valued random
variable. It has mean zero since weights are sampled from
distributions with mean zero. Denote the covariance and
correlation of gradients by
C(i, j) = E[ri rj ] and R(i, j) = q

E[ri rj ]

E[r2i ] · E[r2j ]

a) The variance of the gradient at x(i) is C fnn (i) = 1.

,

where the expectations are w.r.t the distribution on weights.
3.1. Feedforward networks
Without loss of generality, pick a neuron n separated from
the output by L layers. The first major result is
Theorem 1 (covariance of gradients in feedforward nets).
Suppose weights are initialized with variance 2 = N2 following He et al. (2015). Then

1
.
2L

Part (a) recovers the observation in He et al. (2015) that
setting 2 = N2 preserves the variance across layers in rectifier networks. Part (b) is new. It explains the empirical
observation, figure 2a, that gradients in feedforward nets
whiten with depth. Intuitively, gradients whiten because
the number of paths through the network grows exponentially faster with depth than the fraction of co-active paths,
see section A3 for details.
3.2. Residual networks
The residual modules introduced in He et al. (2016a) are
⇣
⌘
xl = xl 1 + Wl ⇢BN Vl ⇢BN (xl 1 )

where ⇢BN (a) = ⇢(BN (a)) and ⇢(a) = max(0, a) is the
rectifier. We analyse the stripped-down variant
xl = ↵ · xl

1

+

· Wl ⇢BN (xl

1)

(2)

where ↵ and are rescaling factors. Dropping Vl ⇢BN
makes no essential difference to the analysis. The rescaling was introduced in Szegedy et al. (2016) where
it was observed setting 2 [0.1, 0.3] reduces instability.
We include ↵ for reasons of symmetry.
Theorem 2 (covariance of gradients in resnets). Consider
a resnet with batch normalization disabled and ↵ = =
1. Suppose 2 = N2 as above. Then
a) The variance of the gradient at x(i) is C res (i) = 2L .

The Shattered Gradients Problem

b) The covariance is C res (i, j) =
The correlation is Rres (i, j) =

3 L
.
2

tava et al., 2015; Greff et al., 2017). The standard highway
network has layers of the form

3 L
.
4

xl = 1

The theorem implies there are two problems in resnets
without batch normalization: (i) the variance of gradients
grows and (ii) their correlation decays exponentially with
depth. Both problems are visible empirically.

A solution to the exploding variance of resnets is to rescale
layers by ↵ = p12 which yields
res p
p (i, j) =
C↵=
(i) = 1 and Rres
2
↵= 2

✓ ◆L
3
4

and so controls the variance but the correlation between
gradients still decays exponentially with depth. Both theoretical predictions hold empirically.
In practice, ↵-rescaling is not used. Instead, activations are
rescaled by batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)
and, more recently, setting 2 [0.1, 0.3] per Szegedy et al.
(2016). The effect is dramatic:
Theorem 3 (covariance of gradients in resnets with BN and
rescaling). Under the assumptions above, for resnets with
batch normalization and -rescaling,
2

(L

1)

· xl

1

+ T (xl

1)

· H(xl

1)

where T (·) and H(·) are learned gates and features respectively. Consider the following modification where 1 and
2
2
2 are scalars satisfying 1 + 2 = 1:
xl =

3.3. Rescaling in Resnets

a) the variance is C res,BN (i) =

T (xl

1

· xl

1

+

2

· Wl ⇢(xl

1)

The module can be recovered by judiciously choosing ↵
and in equation (2). However, it is worth studying in its
own right:
Corollary 1 (covariance of gradients in highway networks). Under the assumptions above, for modified highway networks with -rescaling,
a) the variance of gradients is C HN (i) = 1; and
b) the correlation is RHN (i, j) =

2
1

+

1 2 L
.
2 2

q
q
1
In particular, if 1 =
1 L1 and 2 =
L then the
correlation between gradients does not decay with depth
1
lim RHN (i, j) = p .
L!1
e

1) + 1;
p
b) the covariance1 is C res,BN (i, j) ⇠
L; and

The tradeoff is that the contributions of the layers becomes
increasingly trivial (i.e. close to the identity) as L ! 1.

the correlation is Rres,BN (i, j) ⇠

4. Gradients shatter in convnets

1
p

L

.

The theorem explains the empirical observation, figure 2a,
that gradients in resnets whiten much more slowly with
depth than feedforward nets. It also explains why setting
near zero further reduces whitening.
Batch normalization changes the decay of the correlations
from 21L to p1L . Intuitively, the reason is that the variance
of the outputs of layers grows linearly, so batch normalization rescales them by different amounts. Rescaling by
introduces a constant factor. Concretely, the model predicts using batch normalization with = 0.1 on a 100layer resnet gives typical correlation Rres
0.1,BN (i, j) = 0.7.
Setting = 1.0 gives Rres
1.0,BN (i, j) = 0.1. By contrast, a
100-layer feedforward net has correlation indistinguishable
from zero.
3.4. Highway networks
Highway networks can be thought of as a generalization of
resnets, that were in fact introduced slightly earlier (Srivas1

See section A3.4 for exact computations.

In this section we provide empirical evidence that the main
results also hold for deep convnets using the C IFAR -10
dataset. We instantiate feedforward and resnets with 2,
4, 10, 24 and 50 layers of equivalent size. Using a slight
modification of the “bottleneck” architecture in He et al.
(2016a), we introduce one skip-connection for every two
convolutional layers and both network architectures use
batch normalization.
Figures 5a and b compare the covariance of gradients in
the first layer of feedforward and resnets ( = 0.1) with a
minibatch of 256 random samples from C IFAR -10 for networks of depth 2 and 50. To highlight the spatial structure
of the gradients, the indices of the minibatches were reordered according to a k-means clustering (k = 10) applied
to the gradients of the two-layer networks. The same permutation is used for all networks within a row. The spatial
structure is visible in both two-layer networks, although it
is more apparent in the resnet. In the feedforward network
the structure quickly disappears with depth. In the resnet,
the structure remains apparent at 50 layers.

The Shattered Gradients Problem
Feedforward net
=0.1
=0.3
=1.0

0.24

0.4

Gradient norm

Feedforward

Relative Effective Rank

Resnet

0.6

0.2

0

0.12

10

20

30

40

Depth

(a) Depth = 2

(b) Depth = 50

0.18

(c) Relative effective rank.

50

0.06

10

20

30

40

50

Depth

(d) Gradient norm.

Figure 5: Results on C IFAR -10. Figures a–b show the covariance matrices for a single minibatch for feedforward- and
resnets. Figures c–d show the relative effective rank and average norms of the gradients averaged over 30 minibatches.
To quantify this effect we consider the “whiteness” of the
gradient using relative effective rank. Let
be the matrix whose columns are the gradients with respect to the
input, for each datapoint x(i) in a minibatch. The effective
rank is r( ) = tr( > )/k k22 and measures the intrinsic dimension of a matrix (Vershynin, 2012). It is bounded
above by the rank of —a matrix with highly correlated
columns and therefore more structure will have a lower effective rank. We are interested in the effective rank of the
covariance matrix of the gradients relative to a “white” matrix Y of the same dimensions with i.i.d. Gaussian entries.
The relative effective rank r( )/r(Y) measures the similarity between the second moments of and Y.

5. The “looks linear” initialization

Figure 5c shows that the relative effective rank (averaged
over 30 minibatches) grows much faster as a function of
depth for networks without skip-connections. For resnets,
the parameter slows down the rate of growth of the effective rank as predicted by theorem 3.

The key observation is that initializing weights with a mirrored block structure yields linear outputs
✓
◆
⇢(x)
W
W ·
= W⇢(x) W⇢( x) = Wx.
⇢( x)

Figure 5d shows the average `2 -norm of the gradient in
each coordinate (normalized by the standard deviation
computed per minibatch). We observe that this quantity
decays much more rapidly as a function of depth for feedforward networks. This is due to the effect of averaging
increasingly whitening gradients within each minibatch.
In other words, the noise within minibatches overwhelms
the signal. The phenomenon is much less pronounced in
resnets.

The output will cease to be linear as soon as weight updates
cause the two blocks to diverge.

Taken together these results confirm the results in section 3
for networks with convolutional layers and show that the
gradients in resnets are indeed more structured than those
in feedforward nets and therefore do not vanish when averaged within a minibatch. This phenomena allows for the
training of very deep resnets.

Shattering gradients are not a problem for linear networks,
see remark after equation (1). Unfortunately, linear networks are not useful since they lack expressivity.
The LL-init combines the best of linear and rectifier nets by
initializing rectifiers to look linear. Several implementations are possible; see Zagoruyko & Komodakis (2017) for
related architectures yielding good empirical results. We
use concatenated rectifiers or CReLUs (Shang et al., 2016):
✓
◆
⇢(x)
x 7!
⇢( x)

An alternative architecture is based on the PReLU introduced in He et al. (2015):
(
x
if x > 0
PReLU: ⇢p (x) =
ax else.
Setting a = 1 at initialization obtains a different kind of
LL-init. Preliminary experiments, not shown, suggest that
the LL-init is more effective on the CReLU-based architecture than PReLU. The reason is unclear.
Orthogonal convolutions. A detailed analysis of learning in linear neural networks by Saxe et al. (2014) showed,
theoretically and experimentally, that arbitrarily deep linear
networks can be trained when initialized with orthogonal
weights. Motivated by these results, we use the LL-init in
conjunction with orthogonal weights.

The Shattered Gradients Problem

Updates were performed with Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015).
Training schedules were automatically determined by an
auto-scheduler that measures how quickly the loss on the
training set has been decreasing over the last ten epochs,
and drops the learning rate if a threshold remains crossed
for five measurements in a row. Standard data augmentation was performed; translating up to 4 pixels in any direction and flipping horizontally with p = 0.5.

0.85

Accuracy

0.75
0.65
CReLU w/ LL
Resnet
CReLU w/o LL
ReLU
Linear

0.55
0.45
0.35
0.25

6

14

30

54

102

198

Depth

Figure 6: C IFAR -10 test accuracy. Comparison of test accuracy between networks of different depths with and without LL initialization.
We briefly describe how we orthogonally initialize a kernel
K of size A ⇥ B ⇥ 3 ⇥ 3 where A B. First, set all the
entries of K to zero. Second, sample a random matrix W
of size (A ⇥ B) with orthonormal columns. Finally, set
K[:, :, 2, 2] := W. The kernel is used in conjunction with
strides of one and zero-padding.
5.1. Experiments
We investigated the performance of the LL-init on very
deep networks, evaluated on C IFAR -10. The aim was not
to match the state-of-the-art, but rather to test the hypothesis that shattered gradients adversely affect training in very
deep rectifier nets. We therefore designed an experiment
where (concatenated) rectifier nets are and are not shattered
at initialization. We find that the LL-init allows to train significantly deeper nets, which confirms the hypothesis.
We compared a CReLU architecture with an orthogonal
LL-init against an equivalent CReLU network, resnet, and a
standard feedforward ReLU network. The other networks
were initialized according to He et al. (2015). The architectures are thin with the number of filters per layer in the
ReLU networks ranging from 8 at the input layer to 64, see
section A4. Doubling with each spatial extent reduction.
The thinness of the architecture makes it particularly difficult for gradients to propagate at high depth. The reduction
is performed by convolutional layers with strides of 2, and
following the last reduction the representation is passed to
a fully connected layer with 10 neurons for classification.
The numbers of filters per layer
p of the CReLU models were
adjusted by a factor of 1/ 2 to achieve parameter parity
with the ReLU models. The Resnet version of the model is
the same as the basic ReLU model with skip-connections
after every two modules following He et al. (2016a).

Results are shown in figure 6. Each point is the mean of
10 trained models. The ReLU and CReLU nets performed
steadily worse with depth; the ReLU net performing worse
than the linear baseline of 40% at the maximum depth of
198. The feedforward net with LL-init performs comparably to a resnet, suggesting that shattered gradients are a
large part of the problem in training very deep networks.

6. Conclusion
The representational power of rectifier networks depends
on the number of linear regions into which it splits the input space. It was shown in Montufar et al. (2014) that the
number of linear regions can grow exponentially with depth
(but only polynomially with width). Hence deep neural
networks are capable of far richer mappings than shallow
ones (Telgarsky, 2016). An underappreciated consequence
of the exponential growth in linear regions is the proliferation of discontinuities in the gradients of rectifier nets.
This paper has identified and analyzed a previously unnoticed problem with gradients in deep networks: in a
randomly initialized network, the gradients of deeper layers are increasingly uncorrelated. Shattered gradients play
havoc with the optimization methods currently in use2 and
may explain the difficulty in training deep feedforward
networks even when effective initialization and batch normalization are employed. Averaging gradients over minibatches becomes analogous to integrating over white noise
– there is no clear trend that can be summarized in a single
average direction. Shattered gradients can also introduce
numerical instabilities, since small differences in the input
can lead to large differences in gradients.
Skip-connections in combination with suitable rescaling
reduce shattering. Specifically, we show that the rate at
which correlations between gradients decays changes from
exponential for feedforward architectures to sublinear for
resnets. The analysis uncovers a surprising and (to us at
least) unexpected side-effect of batch normalization. An
alternate solution to the shattering gradient problem is to
design initializations that do not shatter such as the LLinit. An interesting future direction is to investigate hybrid
architectures combining the LL-init with skip connections.
2
Note that even the choice of a step size in SGD typically reflects an assumption about the correlation scale of the gradients.

The Shattered Gradients Problem

References
Balduzzi, David. Deep Online Convex Optimization with Gated
Games. In arXiv:1604.01952, 2016.
Balduzzi, David, Vanchinathan, Hastagiri, and Buhmann,
Joachim. Kickback cuts Backprop’s red-tape: Biologically
plausible credit assignment in neural networks. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2015.
Balduzzi, David, McWilliams, Brian, and Butler-Yeoman, Tony.
Neural Taylor Approximations: Convergence and Exploration
in Rectifier Networks. In ICML, 2017.
Bengio, Y, Lamblin, P, Popovici, D., and Larochelle, H. Greedy
Layer-Wise Training of Deep Networks. In NIPS, 2006.
Bengio, Yoshua, Simard, P, and Frasconi, P. Learning long-term
dependencies with gradient descent is difficult. IEEE Trans.
Neur. Net., 5(2):157–166, 1994.
Choromanska, A, Henaff, M, Mathieu, M, Arous, G B, and LeCun, Y. The loss surface of multilayer networks. In Journal of
Machine Learning Research: Workshop and Conference Proceeedings, volume 38 (AISTATS), 2015.
Glorot, Xavier and Bengio, Yoshua. Understanding the difficulty
of training deep feedforward neural networks. In AISTATS,
2010.
Greff, Klaus, Srivastava, Rupesh Kumar, and Schmidhuber, Juergen. Highway and Residual Networks learn Unrolled Iterative
Estimation. In ICLR, 2017.
Hardt, Moritz and Ma, Tengyu. Identity Matters in Deep Learning. In ICLR, 2017.
He, Kaiming, Zhang, Xiangyu, Ren, Shaoqing, and Sun, Jian.
Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level Performance on ImageNet Classification. In ICCV, 2015.
He, Kaiming, Zhang, Xiangyu, Ren, Shaoqing, and Sun, Jian.
Identity Mappings in Deep Residual Networks. In ECCV,
2016a.
He, Kaiming, Zhang, Xiangyu, Ren, Shaoqing, and Sun, Jian.
Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In CVPR,
2016b.
Hinton, GE, Osindero, S, and Teh, Y W. A Fast Learning Algorithm for Deep Belief Nets. Neural Computation, 18:1527–
1554, 2006.
Hochreiter, Sepp. Untersuchungen zu dynamischen neuronalen
Netzen. Master’s thesis, Technische Universität München,
1991.
Ioffe, Sergey and Szegedy, Christian. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate
shift. In ICML, 2015.
Kingma, Diederik P and Ba, Jimmy Lei. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Krizhevsky, A, Sutskever, I, and Hinton, G E. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2012.

Mishkin, D and Matas, J. All you need is a good init. In ICLR,
2016.
Montufar, Guido F, Pascanu, Razvan, Cho, Kyunghyun, and Bengio, Yoshua. On the number of linear regions of deep neural
networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2924–2932, 2014.
Orhan, A Emin. Skip Connections as Effective SymmetryBreaking. In arXiv:1701.09175, 2017.
Saxe, Andrew M, McClelland, James L, and Ganguli, Surya. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of learning in deep linear neural networks. In ICLR, 2014.
Shang, Wenling, Sohn, Kihyuk, Almeida, Diogo, and Lee,
Honglak. Understanding and Improving Convolutional Neural
Networks via Concatenated Rectified Linear Units. In ICML,
2016.
Srivastava, Rupesh Kumar, Greff, Klaus, and Schmidhuber, Juergen. Highway Networks. In arXiv:1505.00387, 2015.
Sussillo, David and Abbott, L F. Random Walk Initialization for
Training Very Deep Feedforward Networks. In ICLR, 2015.
Sutskever, Ilya, Martens, James, Dahl, George, and Hinton, Geoffrey. On the importance of initialization and momentum in
deep learning. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-13), pp. 1139–1147, 2013.
Szegedy, Christian, Liu, Wei, Jia, Yangqing, Sermanet, Pierre,
Reed, Scott, Anguelov, Dragomir, Erhan, Dumitru, Vanhoucke, Vincent, and Rabinovich, Andrew. Going Deeper With
Convolutions. In CVPR, 2015.
Szegedy, Christian, Ioffe, Sergey, and Vanhoucke, Vincent.
Inception-v4, Inception-ResNet and the Impact of Residual
Connections on Learning. In arXiv:1602.07261, 2016.
Telgarsky, Matus. Benefits of depth in neural networks. In COLT,
2016.
Veit, Andreas, Wilber, Michael J, and Belongie, Serge. Residual
Networks Behave Like Ensembles of Relatively Shallow Networks. In NIPS, 2016.
Vershynin, Roman. Introduction to the non-asymptotic analysis of
random matrices. In Compressed sensing, pp. 210–268. Cambridge Univ Press, 2012.
Zagoruyko, Sergey and Komodakis, Nikos. DiracNets: Training Very Deep Neural Networks Without Skip-Connections. In
arXiv:1706.00388, 2017.

