Dueling Bandits with Weak Regret

Bangrui Chen 1 Peter I. Frazier 1

Abstract
We consider online content recommendation with
implicit feedback through pairwise comparisons,
formalized as the so-called dueling bandit problem. We study the dueling bandit problem in
the Condorcet winner setting, and consider two
notions of regret: the more well-studied strong
regret, which is 0 only when both arms pulled are
the Condorcet winner; and the less well-studied
weak regret, which is 0 if either arm pulled is the
Condorcet winner. We propose a new algorithm
for this problem, Winner Stays (WS), with variations for each kind of regret: WS for weak regret
(WS-W) has expected cumulative weak regret that
is O(N 2 ), and O(N log(N )) if arms have a total
order; WS for strong regret (WS-S) has expected
cumulative strong regret of O(N 2 + N log(T )),
and O(N log(N ) + N log(T )) if arms have a total order. WS-W is the first dueling bandit algorithm with weak regret that is constant in time.
WS is simple to compute, even for problems with
many arms, and we demonstrate through numerical experiments on simulated and real data that
WS has significantly smaller regret than existing
algorithms in both the weak- and strong-regret
settings.

1. Introduction
We consider bandit learning in personalized content recommendation with implicit pairwise comparisons. We offer
pairs of items to a user and record implicit feedback on
which offered item is preferred, seeking to learn the user’s
preferences over items quickly, while also ensuring that the
fraction of time we fail to offer a high-quality item is small.
Implicit pairwise comparisons avoid the inaccuracy of user
ratings (Joachims et al., 2007) and the difficulty of engaging
users in providing explicit feedback.
1
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. Correspondence to: Peter I.
Frazier <pf98@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

We study a model for this setting called the dueling bandit
problem (Yue & Joachims, 2009). The items we may offer
to the user are called “arms”, and we learn about these arms
through a sequence of “duels”. In each duel, we “pull” two
arms and receive noisy feedback from the user telling us
which arm is preferred. When an arm is preferred within a
duel, we say that the arm has “won the duel".
We study this problem in the Condorcet winner setting, in
which we assume the existence of an arm (the Condorcet
winner) that wins with probability at least 12 when paired
with any of the other arms. In these settings, we consider
two notions of regret: “weak regret“, in which we avoid
regret by selecting the Condorcet winner as either arm in the
duel; and “strong-regret”, in which we can only avoid regret
by setting both arms in the duel to the Condorcet winner.
Weak regret was proposed by Yue et al. (2012) and arises
in content recommendation when arms correspond to items,
and the user incurs no regret whenever his most preferred
item is made available. Examples include in-app restaurant
recommendations provided by food delivery services like
Grubhub and UberEATS, in which implicit feedback may
be inferred from selections, and the user only incurs regret
if her most preferred restaurant is not recommended. Examples also include recommendation of online broadcasters on
platforms such as Twitch, in which implicit feedback may
again be inferred from selections, and the user is fully satisfied as long as her favored broadcaster is listed. Despite its
applicability, Yue et al. (2012) is the only paper of which we
are aware that studies weak regret, and it does not provide
algorithms specifically designed for this setting.
Strong regret has been more widely studied, as discussed
below, and has application to choosing ranking algorithms
for search (Hofmann et al., 2013). To perform a duel, query
results from two rankers are interleaved (Radlinski et al.,
2008), and the ranking algorithm that provided the first
result chosen by the user is declared the winner of the duel.
Strong regret is appropriate in this setting because the user’s
experience is enhanced by pulling the best arm twice, so
that all of that ranker’s results are shown.
Our contribution is a new algorithm, Winner Stays (WS),
with variants designed for the weak (WS-W) and strong
regret (WS-S) settings. We prove that WS-W has expected
cumulative weak regret that is constant in time, with de-

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2017

pendence on the number of arms N given by O(N 2 ). If
the arms have a total order, we show a tighter bound of
O(N log N ). We then prove that WS-S has expected cumulative strong regret that is O(N 2 + N log(T )), and prove
that a tighter bound of O(N log(N ) + N log(T )) holds if
arms have a total order. These regret bounds are optimal
in T , and for weak regret are strictly better than those for
any previously proposed algorithm, although at the same
time both strong and weak regret bounds are sensitive to
the minimum gap in winning probability between arms. We
demonstrate through numerical experiments on simulated
and real data that WS-W and WS-S significantly outperform
existing algorithms on strong and weak regret.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews related
work. Section 3 formulates our problem. Section 4 introduces the Winner Stays (WS) algorithm: Section 4.1 defines
WS-W for the weak regret setting; Section 4.2 proves that
WS-W has cumulative expected regret that is constant in
time; Section 4.3 defines WS-S for the strong regret setting
and bounds its regret. Section 4.4 disusses a simple extension of our theoretical results to the utility-based bandit
setting, which is used in our numerical experiments. Section 5 compares WS with three benchmark algorithms using
both simulated and real datasets, finding that WS outperforms these benchmarks on the problems considered.

2. Related Work
Most work on dueling bandits focuses on strong regret. Yue
et al. (2012) shows that the worst-case expected cumulative
strong regret up to time T for any algorithm is Ω(N log(T )).
Algorithms have been proposed that reach this lower bound
under the Condorcet winner assumption in the finite-horizon
setting: Interleaved Filter (IF) (Yue et al., 2012) and Beat
the Mean (BTM) (Yue & Joachims, 2011). Relative Upper Confidence Bound (RUCB) (Zoghi et al., 2014) also
reaches this lower bound in the horizonless setting. Relative Minimum Empirical Divergence (RMED) (Komiyama
et al., 2015) is the first algorithm to have a regret bound that
matches this lower bound. Zoghi et al. (2015) proposed two
algorithms, Copeland Confidence Bound (CCB) and Scalable Copeland Bandits (SCB), which achieve an optimal
regret bound without assuming existence of a Condorcet
winner.
While weak regret was proposed in Yue et al. (2012), it has
not been widely studied to our knowledge, and despite its
applicability we are unaware of papers that provide algorithms designed for it specifically. While one can apply
algorithms designed for the strong regret setting to weak
regret, and use the fact that strong dominates weak regret to
obtain weak regret bounds of O(N log(T )), these are looser
than the constant-in-T bounds that we show.

Active learning using pairwise comparisons is also closely
related to our work. Jamieson & Nowak (2011) considers
an active learning problem that is similar to our problem in
that the primary goal is to sort arms based on the user’s preferences, using adaptive pairwise comparisons. It proposes
a novel algorithm, the Query Selection Algorithm (QSA),
that uses an expected number of operations of d log(N ) to
sort N arms, where d is the dimension of the space in which
the arms are embedded, rather than N log(N ). Busa-Fekete
et al. (2013) and Busa-Fekete et al. (2014) consider topk element selection using adaptive pairwise comparisons.
They propose a generalized racing algorithm focusing on
minimizing sample complexity. (Pallone et al., 2017) studies adaptive preference learning across arms using pairwise
preferences. They show that a greedy algorithm is Bayesoptimal for an entropy objective. While similar in that they
use pairwise comparisons, these algorithms are different in
focus from the current work because they do not consider
cumulative regret.

3. Problem Formulation
We consider N items (arms). At each time t = 1, 2, . . .,
the system chooses two items and shows them to the user,
i.e., the system performs a duel between two arms. The
user then provides binary feedback indicating her preferred
item, determining which arm wins the duel. This binary
feedback is random, and is conditionally independent of all
past interactions given the pair of arms shown. We let pi,j
denote the probability that the user gives feedback indicating
a preference for arm i, when shown arms i and j. If the user
prefers arm i over arm j, we assume pi,j > 0.5. We also
assume symmetry: pi,j = 1 − pj,i .
We assume arm 1 is a Condorcet winner, i.e., that p1,i > 0.5
for i = 2, · · · , N . In some results, we also consider the
setting in which arms have a total order, by which we mean
that the arms are ordered so that pi,j > 0.5 for all i < j.
The total order assumption implies transitivity.
We let p = minpi,j >0.5 pi,j > 0.5 be a lower bound on the
probability that the user will choose her favourite arm.
We consider both weak and strong regret in its binary form.
The single-period weak regret incurred at this time is r(t) =
1 if we do not pull the best arm and r(t) = 0 otherwise.
The single-period strong regret is r(t) = 1 if we do not
pull the best arm twice and r(t) = 0 otherwise. We also
consider utility-based extensions of weak and strong regret
in Section 4.4.
We use the same notation r(t) to denote strong and weak
regret, and rely on context to distinguish the two cases. In
both cases, we P
define the cumulative regret up to time T
T
to be R(T ) = t=1 r(t). We measure the quality of an
algorithm by its expected cumulative regret.

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2017

4. Winner Stays
We now propose an algorithm, called Winner Stays (WS),
with two variants: WS-W designed for weak regret; and
WS-S for strong regret. Section 4.1 introduces WS-W
and illustrates its dynamics. Section 4.2 proves the expected cumulative weak regret of WS-W is O(N 2 ) under the Condorcet winner setting, and O(N log(N )) under the total order setting. Section 4.3 introduces WS-S
and proves that its expected cumulative strong regret is
O(N 2 + N log(T )) under the Condorcet winner setting,
and O(N log(T ) + N log(N )) under the total order setting,
both of which have optimal dependence on T . Section 4.4
extends our theoretical results to utility-based bandits.
4.1. Winner Stays with Weak Regret (WS-W)
We now present WS-W, first defining some notation. Let
qi,j (t) be the number of times that arm i has defeated arm j
in
Pa duel, up to and including time t. Then, define C(t, i) =
j6=i qi,j (t) − qj,i (t). C(t, i) is the difference between the
number of duels won and lost by arm i, up to time t. With
this notation, we define WS-W in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 WS-W
Input: arms 1, · · · , N
for t = 1, 2, · · · do
Step 1: Pick it = arg maxi C(t−1, i), breaking ties as
follows:
• If t > 1 and it−1 ∈ arg maxi C(t−1, i), set it = it−1 .
• Else if t > 1 and jt−1 ∈ arg maxi C(t − 1, i),
set it = jt−1 .
• Else choose it uniformly at random from
arg maxi C(t − 1, i).
Step 2: Pick jt = arg maxj6=it C(t−1, j), breaking ties
as follows:
• If t > 1 and it−1 ∈ arg maxi6=it C(t − 1, i) \ {it },
set jt = it−1 .
• Else if t > 1 and jt−1 ∈ arg maxi6=it C(t−1, i)\{it },
set jt = jt−1 .
• Else choose jt uniformly at random from
arg maxj C(t − 1, j) \ {it }.
Step 3: Pull arms it and jt ;
Step 4: Observe noisy binary feedback and update
C(t, it ) and C(t, jt );
end

WS-W’s pulls can be organized into iterations, each of
which consists of a sequence of pulls of the same pair of
arms, and rounds, each of which consists of a sequence of
iterations in which arms that lose an iteration are not visited
again until the next round. We first describe iterations and
rounds informally with an example and in Figure 1 before
presenting our formal analysis.

Example: At time t = 1, C(0, i) = 0 for all i, and WS-W
pulls two randomly chosen arms. Suppose it pulls arms
i1 = 1, j1 = 2 and arm 1 wins. Then C(1, i) is 1 for arm
1, −1 for arm 2, and 0 for the other arms. This first pull is
an iteration of length 1, arm 1 is the winner, and arm 2 is
the loser. This iteration is in the first round. We call t1 = 1
the start of the first round, and t1,1 = 1 the start of the first
iteration in the first round.
At time t = 2, C(t − 1, i) is largest for arm 1 so WS-W
chooses i2 = 1. Since C(t − 1, i) is −1 for arm 2 and 0
for the other arms, WS-W chooses j2 at random from arms
3 through N (suppose N > 2). Suppose it chooses arm
j2 = 3. This pair of arms (1 and 3) is different from the pair
pulled in the previous iteration (1 and 2), so t1,2 = 2 is the
start of the second iteration (in the first round).
WS-W continues pulling arms 1 and 3 until C(t, i) is −1
for one of these arms and 2 for the other. WS-W continues
to pull only arms 1 and 3 until one has C(t, i) = 2 even
though this may involve times when C(t, i) is 0 for both
arms 1 and 3, causing them to be tied with arms 4 and above,
because we break ties to prioritize pulling previously pulled
arms. The sequence of times when we pull arms 1 and 3 is
the second iteration. The arm that ends the iteration with
C(t, i) = 2 is the winner of that iteration.
WS-W continues this process, performing N − 1 iterations
on different pairs of arms, pitting the winner of each iteration
against a previously unplayed arm in the next iteration. This
sequence of iterations is the first round. The winner of
the final iteration in the first round, call it arm Z(1), has
C(t, Z(1)) = N − 1 and all other arms j 6= Z(1) have
C(t, j) = −1.
The second round begins on the next pull after the end of
the first round, at time t2 . WS-W again performs N − 1
iterations, playing Z(1) in the first iteration. Each iteration
has a winner that passes to the next iteration.
WS-W repeats this process for an infinite number of rounds.
Each round is a sequence of N −1 iterations, and an arm
that loses an iteration is not revisited until the next round.
Figure 1 illustrates these dynamics, and we formalize the
definition of round and iteration in the next section.
4.2. Analysis of WS-W
In this section, we analyze the weak regret of WS-W. After
presenting definitions and preliminary results, we prove
WS-W has expected cumulative weak regret bounded by
O(N log(N )) when arms have a total order. Then, in the
more general Condorcet winner setting, we prove WS-W
has expected cumulative weak regret bounded by O(N 2 ).
We leave the proofs of all lemmas to the supplement.
We define t` , the beginning of round `, and Z(` − 1), the

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2017

Figure 1. Our analysis of WS-W decomposes its behavior into a sequence of rounds. In each round, pairs of arms play each other in a
sequence of iterations. The winner from an iteration passes on to play a new arm in the next iteration randomly selected from those that
have not yet played in the round. At the end of a round, the round’s winner is considered first in the next round.

winner of round `, as the unique time and arm such C(t` −
1, Z(` − 1)) = (N − 1)(` − 1) and C(t` − 1, i) = −` + 1
for all i 6= Z(` − 1).
We define t`,k , the beginning of iteration k in round `, as
the first time we pull the k th unique pair of arms in the `th
round. We let T`,k be the number of successive pulls of this
pair of arms.
We additionally define terminology to describe arms pulled
in an iteration. In a duel between arms i and j with pi,j >
0.5, arm i is called the better arm and arm j is called the
worse arm. We say that an arm i is the incumbent in iteration
k iteration and round ` if C(t`,k −1,i) > 0. A unique such
arm exists except when ` = k = 1. When ` = k = 1,
the incumbent is the better of the two arms being played.
We call the arm being played that is not the incumbent the
challenger.
Using these definitions, we present our first pair of results
toward bounding the expected cumulative weak regret of
WS-W. They bound the number of pulls in an iteration.
Lemma 1. The conditional expected length of iteration k
in round `, given the arms being pulled, is bounded above
by N (`−1)+k
if the incumbent is worse than the challenger,
2p−1
1
and by 2p−1
if the incumbent is better than the challenger.
Lemma 1 shows that iterations with a worse incumbent use
more pulls. We then bound the number of iterations with a
worse incumbent.
Lemma 2. Under the total order assumption, the conditional expected number of future iterations with an incumbent worse than the challenger, given history up to time t`,k ,
2p2
is bounded above by (2p−1)
3 (log(N ) + 1) for any k, ` ≥ 1.
Lemma 2 implies that the incumbent is worse than the challenger in finitely many iterations with probability 1. We
now bound the tail distribution of the last such round.

Lemma 3. Let L denote the smallest ` such that no round
`0 > ` contains an iteration in which the incumbent
is worse

than the challenger. Then P (L ≥ `) ≤

1−p
p

`

.

To present our final set of preliminary lemmas, we define
several indicator functions. Let B(`, k) be 1 when the incumbent in iteration k of round ` is better than the challenger. Let D(`) be 1 if arm 1 (the best arm) is the incumbent at the beginning of iteration 1 of round `. Denote
B̄(`, k) = 1 − B(`, k) and D̄(`) = 1 − D(`). Let V (`, k)
be 1 if D(`) = 1 and arm 1 loses in any iteration 1 through
k − 1 of round `.
We may only incur weak regret during round ` iteration k
if D̄(`) = 1, or if V (`, k 0 ) = 1 for some k 0 < k. We will
separately bound the regret incurred in these two different
scenarios. Moreover, our bound on the number of pulls,
and thus the regret incurred, in this iteration will depend on
whether B(`, k) = 1 or B̄(`, k) = 1. This leads us to state
four inequalities in the following pair of lemmas, which
we will in turn use to show Theorem 1. The first lemma
applies in both the total order and Condorcet settings, while
the second applies only in the total order setting. When
proving Theorem 2 we replace Lemma 5 by an alternate
pair of inequalities.
Lemma 4.
`−1
1−p
,
p

`
1
1−p
E[V (`, k)B(`, k)T`,k ] ≤
.
2p − 1
p
E[D̄(`)B(`, k)T`,k ] ≤

1
2p − 1



Lemma 5. Under the total order assumption:
• E


hP

i

N −1
is bounded
k=1 D̄(`)B̄(`, k)T`,k
`−1
2
1−p
2N `p
p
(2p−1)4 (log(N ) + 1).

above by

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2017

• E


hP
N −1
k=1

1−p
p

`

i
V (`, k)B̄(`, k)T`,k is bounded above by

2N `p2
(2p−1)4 (log(N )

+ 1).

This is bounded by
" ∞ N −1
#
∞ N
−1
XX
X
X
B̄(`, k)T`,k V (`, k) .
E
B̄(`, k)T`,k D̄(`) +
`=1 k=1

We now state our main result for the total order setting,
which
 showsthat the expected cumulative weak regret is
log(N )
O N(2p−1)
.
5
cumulative weak regret ofiWS-W
Theorem 1. The
h expected
2p3
N
is bounded by (2p−1)6 N (log(N ) + 1) + (2p−1)
under
2
the total order assumption.

`=1 k=1

The first term in the summation can be bounded by the first
inequality of Lemma 5 to obtain
" ∞ N −1
#
XX
E
B̄(`, k)T`,k D̄(`)
`=1 k=1
∞
X

≤
Proof. Iterations can be divided into two types: those in
which the incumbent is better than the challenger, and those
where the incumbent is worse.
We first bound expected total weak regret incurred in the
first type of iteration, and then below bound that incurred in
the second type. In this first bound, observe that we incur
weak regret during round ` if D(`) = 0, or if D(`) = 1 but
arm 1 loses to some other arm during this round. Under
the second scenario, we do not incur any regret until arm 1
loses to another arm.
Thus, the expected weak regret incurred during iterations
with a better incumbent is bounded by
" ∞ N −1
#
∞ N
−1
XX
X
X
E
B(`, k)T`,k D̄(`) +
B(`, k)T`,k V (`, k) .
`=1 k=1

`=1 k=1

The first part of this summation can be bounded by the first
inequality in Lemma 4 to obtain
#
" ∞ N −1
XX
E
B(`, k)T`,k D̄(`)
`=1 k=1
∞ 
X

≤

`=1

1−p
p

`−1

pN
N
=
.
2p − 1
(2p − 1)2

The second part of this summation can be bounded by the
second inequality in Lemma 4 to obtain
" ∞ N −1
#
XX
E
B(`, k)T`,k V (`, k)
`=1 k=1
∞
X

≤

`=1

N
2p − 1



1−p
p

`
=

N (1 − p)
.
(2p − 1)2

Thus, the cumulative expected weak regret incurred during
N
iterations with a better incumbent is bounded by (2p−1)
2.
Now we bound the expected weak regret incurred during
iterations where the incumbent is worse than the challenger.

`=1

=

2N `p(1 − p)
(log(N ) + 1)
(2p − 1)4



1−p
p

`−1

2N p4
(log(N ) + 1).
(2p − 1)6

The second term in the summation can be bounded by the
first inequality of Lemma 5 to obtain
" ∞ N −1
#
XX
E
B̄(`, k)T`,k V (`, k)
`=1 k=1
∞
X

≤

`=1
3

=

2N `p2
(log(N ) + 1)
(2p − 1)4



1−p
p

`

2p (1 − p)
N (log(N ) + 1).
(2p − 1)6

Thus, the cumulative expected weak regret incurred during iterations with a worse incumbent is bounded by
2p3
(2p−1)6 N (log(N ) + 1).
Summing these two bounds,
the cumulative expected weak
h
i
2p3
N
regret is bounded by (2p−1)6 N (log(N ) + 1) + (2p−1)
2 .

We prove the following result for the Condorcet winner
setting in a similar manner in the supplement.
Theorem 2. The expected cumulative weak regret of WSpN 2
N
W is bounded by (2p−1)
2 + (2p−1)3 under the Condorcet
winner setting.
4.3. Winner Stays with Strong Regret (WS-S)
In this section, we define a version of WS for strong regret,
WS-S, which uses WS-W as a subroutine. WS-S is defined
in Algorithm 2
Each round of WS-S consists of an exploration phase and an
exploitation phase. The length of the exploitation phase increases exponentially with the number of phases. Changing
the parameter β balances the lengths of these phases, and
thus balances between exploration and exploitation. Our
theoretical results below guide choosing β.

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2017

(a) Simulated Dataset

(b) Yelp Academic Dataset

Figure 2. Comparison of the weak regret between WS-W, RUCB and QSA using simulated data, and the Yelp academic dataset. In both
experiments, WS-W outperforms RUCB and QSA, provided constant expected cumulative weak regret.

Algorithm 2 WS-S
Input: β > 1, arms 1, · · · , N
for ` = 1, 2, · · · do
Exploration phase: Run the `th round of WS-W.
Exploitation phase: Let Z(`) be the index of the best
arm at the end of the `th round. For the next bβ ` c
time periods, pull arms Z(`) and Z(`) and ignore the
feedback.
end

We now bound the cumulative strong regret of this algorithm
under both the total order and Condorcet winner settings:
Theorem 3. If there is a total order among arms,
p
then for 1 < β <
1−p , the expected cumulative
strong regret for WS-S isi bounded by
h
N logβ (T (β−1))
2p3
.
(2p−1)6 N (log(N ) + 1) +
2p−1
Proof. Suppose at time T, we are in round `. Then β + · · · +
β ` ≤ T . Solving for `, we obtain ` ≤ logβ (T (β − 1)).
We bound the expected strong regret up to time T . The
expected regret can be divided in two parts: the regret occuring during the exploration phase; and the regret occuring
during the exploitation phase.
First we focus on regret incurred during exploration. We
never pull the same arm twice during this phase, and so
regret is incurred in each time period. To bound regret
incurred during exploration, we bound the length of time
spent in this phase.
The length of time spent in exploration up to the end of
−1)`
round ` with a better incumbent is bounded by (N
2p−1 . The
length of time spent with a worse incumbent, based on the
2p3
proof of Theorem 1, is bounded by (2p−1)
6 N (log(N ) + 1).
Now we focus on regret incurred during exploitation. The

probability we have identified the wrong arm at the end of
i

the ith round is less than 1−p
. Thus, the expected regret
p
incurred during this phase up until the end of the `th round
i
P` 
is bounded by i=1 1−p
× β i ≤ `.
p
Overall, this implies that the strong expected regret up to
time T (recall that T is in round `) is bounded by


2p3
(N − 1)`
N (log(N ) + 1) + ` +
(2p − 1)6
2p − 1


N logβ (T (β − 1))
2p3
≤
N (log(N ) + 1) +
.
(2p − 1)6
2p − 1
Thus, the expected strong regret up to time T is
O(N log(T ) + N log(N )).
Theorem 4. Under the Condorcet winner setting and for
p
1 < β < 1−p
, the expected cumulative strong regret for
h 2
i
N log(T (β−1))
N p
WS-S is bounded by (2p−1)
.
2 + (2p−1) log(β)
Proof. The proof mirrors that of Theorem 3, with the only
difference being that we bound the length of exploration
with a worse incumbent using the proof of Theorem 2 rather
than Theorem 1, and the bound is O(N 2 ). Due to its similarity, the proof is omitted.
These results provide guidance on the choice of β. If β is
too close to 1, then we spend most of the time in the exploration phase, which is guaranteed to generate strong regret.
The last inequality in the proof of Theorem 3 suggests that
asymptotic regret will be smallest if we choose β as large
as possible without going beyond the p/(1 − p) threshold.
Indeed, if β is too large, then WS-S may incur large regret
in early exploitation stages when we have finished only a
few rounds of exploration. In our numerical experiments

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2017

we set β = 1.1, which satisfies the p/(1 − p) constraint
assumed by our theory if p > β/(1 + β) ≈ .524. With a
properly chosen β, the numerical experiments in section 5.2
suggest WS-S performs better than previously devised algorithms. At the same time, the best choice of β is dependent
on p. Modifying WS-S to eliminate parameters that must be
chosen with knowledge of p is left for future work.
Our regret bound grows as p, which is the minimal gap
between two arms, shrinks, and p tends to decrease as the
number of arms N increases. Other dueling bandit algorithm for strong regret, such as RUCB and RMED, have
regret bounds with better dependence on the gaps between
arms. Modifying WS-S to provide improved dependence on
these gaps is also left for future work.
4.4. Extension to Utility-Based Regret
We now briefly discuss utility-based extensions of weak and
strong regret for the total order setting, following utilitybased bandits studied in Ailon et al. (2014). Our regret
bounds also apply here, with a small modification.
Suppose that the user has a utility ui associated with each
arm i. Without loss of generality, we assume u1 > u2 >
· · · > uN , and as in the total order setting, we require that
pi,j > 0.5 when i < j. Typically the pi,j would come from
the utilities of arms i and j via a generative model. We give
an example in our numerical experiments.
Then, the single-period utility-based weak regret is r(t) =
u1 − max{uit , ujt }, which is the difference in utility between the best arm overall and the best arm that the user can
choose from those offered. The single-period utility-based
u +u
strong regret is r(t) = u1 − it 2 jt . To get zero regret
under strong regret, the best arm must be pulled twice.
Our results from Section 4 carry through to this more general regret setting. Let R = u1 − uN be the maximum
single-period regret. Then, the expected
 cumulative
 utilityN log(N )
based weak regret for WS-W is O R (2p−1)5 , and the
expected cumulative utility-based strong regret for WS-S is
O(R [N log(T ) + N log(N )]).

5. Numerical Experiments
In this section, we evaluate WS under both the weak and
strong regret settings, considering both their original (binary) and utility-based versions. In the weak regret setting,
we compare WS-W with RUCB and QSA. In the strong
regret setting, we compare WS-S with 7 benchmarks including RUCB and Relative Minimum Empirical Divergence
(RMED) by Komiyama et al. (2015). We also include an experiment violating the total order assumption in Section 11
in the supplement. WS outperforms all benchmarks tested
in these numerical experiments.

5.1. Weak Regret
We now compare WS-W with QSA and RUCB using simulated data and the Yelp academic dataset (Yelp, 2012).
5.1.1. S IMULATED DATA
In this example, we compare WS-W with RUCB and QSA
on a problem with 50 arms and binary weak regret. Each
arm is a 20-dimensional vector uniformly generated from
the unit circle. We assume pi,j = 0.8 for all i < j.
The results are summarized in Figure 2a. RUCB has approximately linear regret over the time horizon pictured.
This is common in the dueling bandits literature, where
many algorithms require ∼ 104 comparisons before they
achieve log(T ) cumulative regret for 50 arms. WS-W finds
the optimal arm after ∼ 500 comparisons and has a regret
that is consistent with our theoretically established constant
expected cumulative weak regret.
5.1.2. Y ELP ACADEMIC DATASET
In this example, we compare WS-W with RUCB and QSA
using the Yelp academic dataset (Yelp, 2012) and utilitybased weak regret.
We choose 100 restaurants from Las Vegas as our arms.
Associated with each arm (restaurant) i is a 20-dimensional
feature vector Ai , calculated using doc2vec (Rehurek &
Sojka, 2010) from its reviews. We select 49 users who have
reviewed at least 20 of these 100 restaurants. For each user,
we model their utility for restaurant i as ui = Ai · θ, where
θ is a 20-dimensional vector of preferences. We infer θ for
each user using linear regression.
To model pi,j , we then use the probit model. We let σ̂ 2
be the estimated variance of the residuals from the linear
regression above. When presented with two restaurants, we
model the user as taking independent random draws from a
normal distribution with means ui and uj respectively and
variances σˆ2 , and choosing the restaurant with the larger
draw. This gives pij = Φ(ui − uj ), where Φ(·) is the cdf
for the normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 2σ̂ 2 .
We simulate performance for each user separately, and then
average the results. These results are summarized in Figure 2b. WS-W outperforms RUCB and QSA, finding the
optimal restaurant after ∼ 500 iterations.
5.2. Strong Regret
In this section, we compare WS-S using binary and utilitybased strong regret with 7 benchmarks from the literature.
We use the sushi and MSLR datasets, which were previously
used by Komiyama et al. (2016) and Zoghi et al. (2015)
respectively to evaluate dueling bandit algorithms.

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2017

(a) Sushi dataset with utility-based strong regret

(b) Sushi dataset with binary strong regret

(c) MSLR dataset with utility-based strong regret

(d) MSLR dataset with binary strong regret

Figure 3. Comparison of the strong regret between WS-S and 7 benchmarks on the sushi and MSLR datasets. For utility-based strong
regret, we start our plot from t = 10 since the performance of all algorithms are close to each other before t = 10. For the same reason,
we start our plot from t = 100 for the binary strong regret. WS-S outperforms all benchmarks in all settings studied.

The sushi dataset (Komiyama et al., 2016) contains 16 arms
corresponding to types of sushi, with pairwise preferences
inferred from data on sushi preferences from 5000 users in
Kamishima (2003). The MSLR dataset has 5 arms, corresponding to ranking algorithms, with pairwise preferences
provided in Zoghi et al. (2015). We give preference matrices
(pi,j ) for both datasets in the supplement. For utility-based
regret, we define ui = 2(1 − p1,i ).
WS-S has a user-defined parameter β. In our experiments
we set β = 1.1. The corresponding minimum p for which
our theoretical bounds hold is β/(1 + β) ≈ 0.52. We
recommend β ≈ 1.1 for problems of 20 arms or fewer, and
β closer to 1 for those problems with more arms that are
likely to have p closer to 1/2. We also conduct a sensitivity
analysis of β in the supplement.
Figure 3 shows the results of our comparisons. WS-S outperforms all 7 benchmarks considered on both datasets using
both variants of strong regret.

6. Conclusion
In this paper, we consider dueling bandits for online content
recommendation using both weak and strong regret.
We propose a new algorithm, WS, with variants designed for
the weak regret (WS-W) and strong regret (WS-S) settings.
We prove WS has constant weak regret and optimal strong
regret in T . In numerical experiments, WS outperforms all
benchmarks considered on both simulated and real datasets.

Acknowledgements
The authors were partially supported by NSF CAREER
CMMI-1254298, NSF CMMI-1536895, NSF IIS-1247696,
NSF DMR-1120296, AFOSR FA9550-12-1-0200, AFOSR
FA9550-15-1-0038, and AFOSR FA9550-16-1-0046.

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2017

References
Ailon, Nir, Karnin, Zohar Shay, and Joachims, Thorsten.
Reducing dueling bandits to cardinal bandits. In ICML,
volume 32, pp. 856–864, 2014.
Busa-Fekete, Róbert, Szörényi, Balázs, Cheng, Weiwei,
Weng, Paul, and Hüllermeier, Eyke. Top-k selection
based on adaptive sampling of noisy preferences. In
ICML (3), pp. 1094–1102, 2013.
Busa-Fekete, Róbert, Hüllermeier, Eyke, and Szörényi,
Balázs. Preference-based rank elicitation using statistical models: The case of mallows. In Proceedings of
the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML-14), pp. 1071–1079, 2014.
Hofmann, Katja, Whiteson, Shimon, and Rijke, Maarten De.
Fidelity, soundness, and efficiency of interleaved comparison methods. ACM Transactions on Information Systems
(TOIS), 31(4):17, 2013.
Jamieson, Kevin G and Nowak, Robert. Active ranking
using pairwise comparisons. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2240–2248, 2011.
Joachims, Thorsten, Granka, Laura, Pan, Bing, Hembrooke,
Helene, Radlinski, Filip, and Gay, Geri. Evaluating the
accuracy of implicit feedback from clicks and query reformulations in web search. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 25(2):7, 2007.
Kamishima, Toshihiro. Nantonac collaborative filtering:
recommendation based on order responses. In Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 583–588.
ACM, 2003.
Komiyama, Junpei, Honda, Junya, Kashima, Hisashi, and
Nakagawa, Hiroshi. Regret lower bound and optimal
algorithm in dueling bandit problem. In COLT, pp. 1141–
1154, 2015.
Komiyama, Junpei, Honda, Junya, and Nakagawa, Hiroshi.
Copeland dueling bandit problem: Regret lower bound,
optimal algorithm, and computationally efficient algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.01677, 2016.
Pallone, Stephen N, Frazier, Peter I, and Henderson,
Shane G.
Bayes-optimal entropy pursuit for active choice-based preference learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.07694, 2017.
Radlinski, Filip, Kurup, Madhu, and Joachims, Thorsten.
How does clickthrough data reflect retrieval quality? In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Information
and knowledge management, pp. 43–52. ACM, 2008.

Rehurek, Radim and Sojka, Petr. Software framework for
topic modelling with large corpora. In In Proceedings of
the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP
Frameworks. Citeseer, 2010.
Yelp, Inc. Yelp academic dataset, 2012. URL https:
//www.yelp.com/dataset_challenge.
Yue, Yisong and Joachims, Thorsten. Interactively optimizing information retrieval systems as a dueling bandits
problem. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1201–1208. ACM,
2009.
Yue, Yisong and Joachims, Thorsten. Beat the mean bandit.
In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML-11), pp. 241–248, 2011.
Yue, Yisong, Broder, Josef, Kleinberg, Robert, and
Joachims, Thorsten. The k-armed dueling bandits problem. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 78(5):
1538–1556, 2012.
Zoghi, Masrour, Whiteson, Shimon, Munos, Remi, Rijke,
Maarten de, et al. Relative upper confidence bound for the
k-armed dueling bandit problem. In JMLR Workshop and
Conference Proceedings, number 32, pp. 10–18. JMLR,
2014.
Zoghi, Masrour, Karnin, Zohar S, Whiteson, Shimon, and
De Rijke, Maarten. Copeland dueling bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
307–315, 2015.

