How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently

Chi Jin 1 Rong Ge 2 Praneeth Netrapalli 3 Sham M. Kakade 4 Michael I. Jordan 1

Abstract
This paper shows that a perturbed form of gradient descent converges to a second-order stationary point in a number iterations which depends
only poly-logarithmically on dimension (i.e., it is
almost “dimension-free”). The convergence rate
of this procedure matches the well-known convergence rate of gradient descent to first-order
stationary points, up to log factors. When all saddle points are non-degenerate, all second-order
stationary points are local minima, and our result
thus shows that perturbed gradient descent can
escape saddle points almost for free. Our results
can be directly applied to many machine learning
applications, including deep learning. As a particular concrete example of such an application,
we show that our results can be used directly to
establish sharp global convergence rates for matrix factorization. Our results rely on a novel
characterization of the geometry around saddle
points, which may be of independent interest to
the non-convex optimization community.

1. Introduction
Given a function f : Rd → R, a gradient descent aims to
minimize the function via the following iteration:
xt+1 = xt − η∇f (xt ),
where η > 0 is a step size. Gradient descent and its variants (e.g., stochastic gradient) are widely used in machine
learning applications due to their favorable computational
properties. This is notably true in the deep learning setting, where gradients can be computed efficiently via backpropagation (Rumelhart et al., 1988).
Gradient descent is especially useful in high-dimensional
settings because the number of iterations required to reach
1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Duke University
Microsoft Research India 4 University of Washington. Correspondence to: Chi Jin <chijin@berkeley.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

a point with small gradient is independent of the dimension
(“dimension-free”). More precisely, for a function that is `gradient Lipschitz (see Definition 1), it is well known that
gradient descent finds an -first-order stationary point (i.e.,
a point x with k∇f (x)k ≤ ) within `(f (x0 ) − f ? )/2 iterations (Nesterov, 1998), where x0 is the initial point and
f ? is the optimal value of f . This bound does not depend
on the dimension of x. In convex optimization, finding an
-first-order stationary point is equivalent to finding an approximate global optimum.
In non-convex settings, however, convergence to first-order
stationary points is not satisfactory. For non-convex functions, first-order stationary points can be global minima,
local minima, saddle points or even local maxima. Finding a global minimum can be hard, but fortunately, for
many non-convex problems, it is sufficient to find a local
minimum. Indeed, a line of recent results show that, in
many problems of interest, all local minima are global minima (e.g., in tensor decomposition (Ge et al., 2015), dictionary learning (Sun et al., 2016a), phase retrieval (Sun
et al., 2016b), matrix sensing (Bhojanapalli et al., 2016;
Park et al., 2016), matrix completion (Ge et al., 2016),
and certain classes of deep neural networks (Kawaguchi,
2016)). Moreover, there are suggestions that in more general deep networks most of the local minima are as good as
global minima (Choromanska et al., 2014).
On the other hand, saddle points (and local maxima) can
correspond to highly suboptimal solutions in many problems (see, e.g., Jain et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2016b). Furthermore, Dauphin et al. (2014) argue that saddle points
are ubiquitous in high-dimensional, non-convex optimization problems, and are thus the main bottleneck in training neural networks. Standard analysis of gradient descent
cannot distinguish between saddle points and local minima,
leaving open the possibility that gradient descent may get
stuck at saddle points, either asymptotically or for a sufficiently long time so as to make training times for arriving at
a local minimum infeasible. Ge et al. (2015) showed that
by adding noise at each step, gradient descent can escape
all saddle points in a polynomial number of iterations, provided that the objective function satisfies the strict saddle
property (see Assumption A2). Lee et al. (2016) proved
that under similar conditions, gradient descent with random initialization avoids saddle points even without adding

How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently

Algorithm 1 Perturbed Gradient Descent (Meta-algorithm)
for t = 0, 1, . . . do
if perturbation condition holds then
x t ← x t + ξt ,
ξt uniformly ∼ B0 (r)
xt+1 ← xt − η∇f (xt )

ture. We show that when local strong convexity is present,
the -dependence goes from a polynomial rate, 1/2 , to linear convergence, log(1/). As an example, we show that
sharp global convergence rates can be obtained for matrix
factorization as a direct consequence of our analysis.
1.1. Our Contributions

noise. However, this result does not bound the number of
steps needed to reach a local minimum.
Previous work explains why gradient descent avoids saddle points in the nonconvex setting, but not why it is efficient—all of them have runtime guarantees with high polynomial dependency in dimension d. For instance, the number of iterations required in Ge et al. (2015) is at least
Ω(d4 ), which is prohibitive in high dimensional setting
such as deep learning (typically with millions of parameters). Therefore, we wonder whether gradient descent type
of algorithms are fundamentally slow in escaping saddle
points, or it is the lack of our theoretical understanding
while gradient descent is indeed efficient. This motivates
the following question: Can gradient descent escape saddle points and converge to local minima in a number of
iterations that is (almost) dimension-free?
In order to answer this question formally, this paper investigates the complexity of finding -second-order stationary
points. For ρ-Hessian Lipschitz functions (see Definition
5), these points are defined as (Nesterov & Polyak, 2006):
√
k∇f (x)k ≤ ,
and
λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≥ − ρ.
Under the assumption that all saddle points are strict
(i.e., for any saddle point xs , λmin (∇2 f (xs )) < 0), all
second-order stationary points ( = 0) are local minima.
Therefore, convergence to second-order stationary points
is equivalent to convergence to local minima.
This paper studies a simple variant of gradient descent
(with phasic perturbations, see Algorithm 1). For `-smooth
functions that are also Hessian Lipschitz, we show that perturbed gradient descent will converge to an -second-order
stationary point in Õ(`(f (x0 ) − f ? )/2 ), where Õ(·) hides
polylog factors. This guarantee is almost dimension free
(up to polylog(d) factors), answering the above highlighted
question affirmatively. Note that this rate is exactly the
same as the well-known convergence rate of gradient descent to first-order stationary points (Nesterov, 1998), up
to log factors. Furthermore, our analysis admits a maximal step size of up to Ω(1/`), which is the same as that in
analyses for first-order stationary points.
As many real learning problems present strong local geometric properties, similar to strong convexity in the global
setting (see, e.g. Bhojanapalli et al., 2016; Sun & Luo,
2016; Zheng & Lafferty, 2016), it is important to note that
our analysis naturally takes advantage of such local struc-

This paper presents the first sharp analysis that shows that
(perturbed) gradient descent finds an approximate secondorder stationary point in at most polylog(d) iterations, thus
escaping all saddle points efficiently. Our main technical
contributions are as follows:
• For `-gradient Lipschitz, ρ-Hessian Lipschitz functions (possibly non-convex), gradient descent with appropriate perturbations finds an -second-order stationary point in Õ(`(f (x0 ) − f ? )/2 ) iterations. This
rate matches the well-known convergence rate of gradient descent to first-order stationary points up to log
factors.
• Under a strict-saddle condition (see Assumption A2),
the same convergence result applies for local minima.
This means that gradient descent can escape all saddle
points with only logarithmic overhead in runtime.
• When the function has local structure, such as local
strong convexity (see Assumption A3.a), the above results can be further improved to linear convergence.
We give sharp rates that are comparable to previous
problem-specific local analysis of gradient descent
with smart initialization (see Section 1.2).
• All the above results rely on a new characterization of
the geometry around saddle points: points from where
gradient descent gets stuck at a saddle point constitute
a thin “band.” We develop novel techniques to bound
the volume of this band. As a result, we can show that
after a random perturbation the current point is very
unlikely to be in the “band”; hence, efficient escape
from the saddle point is possible (see Section 5).
1.2. Related Work
Over the past few years, there have been many problemspecific convergence results for non-convex optimization.
One line of work requires a smart initialization algorithm
to provide a coarse estimate lying inside a local neighborhood, from which popular local search algorithms enjoy
fast local convergence (see, e.g., Netrapalli et al., 2013;
Candes et al., 2015; Sun & Luo, 2016; Bhojanapalli et al.,
2016). While there are not many results that show global
convergence for non-convex problems, Jain et al. (2015)
show that gradient descent yields global convergence rates
for matrix square-root problems. Although these results

How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently
Table 1. Oracle models and iteration complexity for convergence
to second-order stationary point

Algorithm

Iterations

Oracle

Ge et al. (2015)
Levy (2016)
This Work

O(poly(d/))
O(d3 poly(1/))
O(log4 (d)/2 )

Gradient
Gradient
Gradient

Agarwal et al. (2016) O(log(d)/7/4 ) Hessian-vector
Carmon et al. (2016) O(log(d)/7/4 ) Hessian-vector
Carmon & Duchi
O(log(d)/2 ) Hessian-vector
(2016)
Nesterov & Polyak
(2006)
Curtis et al. (2014)

O(1/1.5 )

Hessian

O(1/1.5 )

Hessian

give strong guarantees, the analyses are heavily tailored to
specific problems, and it is unclear how to generalize them
to a wider class of non-convex functions.
For general non-convex optimization, there are a few previous results on finding second-order stationary points.
These results can be divided into the following three categories, where, for simplicity of presentation, we only highlight dependence on dimension d and , assuming that all
other problem parameters are constant from the point of
view of iteration complexity:
Hessian-based: Traditionally, only second-order optimization methods were known to converge to second-order
stationary points. These algorithms rely on computing the
Hessian to distinguish between first- and second-order stationary points. Nesterov & Polyak (2006) designed a cubic
regularization algorithm which converges to an -secondorder stationary point in O(1/1.5 ) iterations. Trust region
algorithms (Curtis et al., 2014) can also achieve the same
performance if the parameters are chosen carefully. These
algorithms typically require the computation of the inverse
of the full Hessian per iteration, which can be very expensive.
Hessian-vector-product-based: A number of recent papers have explored the possibility of using only Hessianvector products instead of full Hessian information in order
to find second-order stationary points. These algorithms require a Hessian-vector product oracle: given a function f ,
a point x and a direction u, the oracle returns ∇2 f (x) · u.
Agarwal et al. (2016) and Carmon et al. (2016) presented
accelerated algorithms that can find an -second-order stationary point in O(log d/7/4 ) steps. Also, Carmon &
Duchi (2016) showed by running gradient descent as a
subroutine to solve the subproblem of cubic regularization

(which requires Hessian-vector product oracle), it is possible to find an -second-order stationary pointin O(log d/2 )
iterations. In many applications such an oracle can be implemented efficiently, in roughly the same complexity as
the gradient oracle. Also, when the function has a Hessian
Lipschitz property such an oracle can be approximated by
differentiating the gradients at two very close points (although this may suffer from numerical issues, thus is seldom used in practice).
Gradient-based: Another recent line of work shows that it
is possible to converge to a second-order stationary point
without any use of the Hessian. These methods feature
simple computation per iteration (only involving gradient
operations), and are closest to the algorithms used in practice. Ge et al. (2015) showed that stochastic gradient descent could converge to a second-order stationary point in
poly(d/) iterations, with polynomial of order at least four.
This was improved in Levy (2016) to O(d3 · poly(1/))
using normalized gradient descent. The current paper improves on both results by showing that perturbed gradient descent can actually find an -second-order stationary
point in O(polylog(d)/2 ) steps, which matches the guarantee for converging to first-order stationary points up to
polylog factors.

2. Preliminaries
In this section, we will first introduce our notation, and then
present some definitions and existing results in optimization which will be used later.
2.1. Notation
We use bold upper-case letters A, B to denote matrices and
bold lower-case letters x, y to denote vectors. Aij means
the (i, j)th entry of matrix A. For vectors we use k·k to
denote the `2 -norm, and for matrices we use k·k and k·kF
to denote spectral norm and Frobenius norm respectively.
We use σmax (·), σmin (·), σi (·) to denote the largest, the
smallest and the i-th largest singular values respectively,
and λmax (·), λmin (·), λi (·) for corresponding eigenvalues.
For a function f : Rd → R, we use ∇f (·) and ∇2 f (·) to
denote its gradient and Hessian, and f ? to denote the global
minimum of f (·). We use notation O(·) to hide only absolute constants which do not depend on any problem parameter, and notation Õ(·) to hide only absolute constants and
(d)
log factors. We let Bx (r) denote the d-dimensional ball
centered at x with radius r; when it is clear from context,
we simply denote it as Bx (r). We use PX (·) to denote projection onto the set X . Distance and projection are always
defined in a Euclidean sense.

How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently

2.2. Gradient Descent
The theory of gradient descent often takes its point of departure to be the study of convex optimization.
Definition 1. A differentiable function f (·) is `-smooth
(or `-gradient Lipschitz) if:
∀x1 , x2 , k∇f (x1 ) − ∇f (x2 )k ≤ `kx1 − x2 k.
Definition 2. A twice-differentiable function f (·) is αstrongly convex if ∀x, λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≥ α
Such smoothness guarantees imply that the gradient can
not change too rapidly, and strong convexity ensures that
there is a unique stationary point (and hence a global minimum). Standard analysis using these two properties shows
that gradient descent converges linearly to a global optimum x? (see e.g. (Bubeck et al., 2015)).
Theorem 1. Assume f (·) is `-smooth and α-strongly convex. For any  > 0, if we run gradient descent with step
size η = 1` , iterate xt will be -close to x? in iterations:

Definition 4. For a differentiable function f (·), we say
that x is a local minimum if x is a first-order stationary
point, and there exists  > 0 so that for any y in the neighborhood of x, we have f (x) ≤ f (y); we also say x
is a saddle point if x is a first-order stationary point but
not a local minimum. For a twice-differentiable function
f (·), we further say a saddle point x is strict (or nondegenerate) if λmin (∇2 f (x)) < 0.
For a twice-differentiable function f (·), we know a saddle
point x must satify λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≤ 0. Intuitively, for
saddle point x to be strict, we simply rule out the undetermined case λmin (∇2 f (x)) = 0, where Hessian information alone is not enough to check whether x is a local
minimum or saddle point. In most non-convex problems,
saddle points are undesirable.
To escape from saddle points and find local minima in a
general setting, we move both the assumptions and guarantees in Theorem 2 one order higher. In particular, we
require the Hessian to be Lipschitz:

2`
kx0 − x? k
log
α


Definition 5. A twice-differentiable function f (·) is ρHessian Lipschitz if:

In a more general setting, we no longer have convexity, let
alone strong convexity. Though global optima are difficult
to achieve in such a setting, it is possible to analyze convergence to first-order stationary points.
Definition 3. For a differentiable function f (·), we say
that x is a first-order stationary point if k∇f (x)k =
0; we also say x is an -first-order stationary point if
k∇f (x)k ≤ .

∀x1 , x2 , k∇2 f (x1 ) − ∇2 f (x2 )k ≤ ρkx1 − x2 k.

Under an `-smoothness assumption, it is well known that
by choosing the step size η = 1` , gradient descent converges to first-order stationary points.
Theorem 2 ((Nesterov, 1998)). Assume that the function
f (·) is `-smooth. Then, for any  > 0, if we run gradient
descent with step size η = 1` and termination condition
k∇f (x)k ≤ , the output will be -first-order stationary
point, and the algorithm will terminate within the following
number of iterations:
`(f (x0 ) − f ? )
.
2
Note that the iteration complexity does not depend explicitly on intrinsic dimension; in the literature this is referred
to as “dimension-free optimization.”
Note that a first-order stationary point can be either a local
minimum or a saddle point or a local maximum. For minimization problems, saddle points and local maxima are undesirable, and we abuse nomenclature to call both of them
“saddle points” in this paper. The formal definition is as
follows:

That is, Hessian can not change dramatically in terms of
spectral norm. We also generalize the definition of firstorder stationary point to higher order:
Definition 6. For a ρ-Hessian Lipschitz function f (·),
we say that x is a second-order stationary point if
k∇f (x)k = 0 and λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≥ 0; we also say x is
-second-order stationary point if:
k∇f (x)k ≤ ,

and

√
λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≥ − ρ

Second-order stationary points are very important in nonconvex optimization because when all saddle points are
strict, all second-order stationary points are exactly local
minima.
Note that the literature sometime defines -second-order
stationary point by two independent error terms; i.e., letting k∇f (x)k ≤ g and λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≥ −H . We instead follow the convention of Nesterov & Polyak (2006)
√
by choosing H = ρg to reflect the natural relations between the gradient and the Hessian.

3. Main Result
In this section we show that it possible to modify gradient descent in a simple way so that the resulting algorithm
will provably converge quickly to a second-order stationary
point.

How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently

Algorithm
2
Perturbed
PGD(x0 , `, ρ, , c, δ, ∆f )
χ ← 3 max{log(
√

d`∆f
c2 δ

Gradient

Descent:

√

), 4}, η ← c` , r ← χ2c · `
q
3
← χc3 · ρ , tthres ← cχ2 · √`ρ

gthres ← χ2c · , fthres
tnoise ← −tthres − 1
for t = 0, 1, . . . do
if k∇f (xt )k ≤ gthres and t − tnoise > tthres then
x̃t ← xt , tnoise ← t
xt ← x̃t + ξt ,
ξt uniformly ∼ B0 (r)
if t − tnoise = tthres and f (xt ) − f (x̃tnoise ) > −fthres
then
return x̃tnoise
xt+1 ← xt − η∇f (xt )

The algorithm that we analyze is a perturbed form of gradient descent (see Algorithm 2). The algorithm is based on
gradient descent with step size η. When the norm of the
current gradient is small (≤ gthres ) (which indicates that the
current iterate x̃t is potentially near a saddle point), the algorithm adds a small random perturbation to the gradient.
The perturbation is added at most only once every tthres iterations.
To simplify the analysis we choose the perturbation ξt to
be uniformly sampled from a d-dimensional ball1 . The use
of the threshold tthres ensures that the dynamics are mostly
those of gradient descent. If the function value does not
decrease enough (by fthres ) after tthres iterations, the algorithm outputs x̃tnoise . The analysis in this section shows that
under this protocol, the output x̃tnoise is necessarily “close”
to a second-order stationary point.
We first state the assumptions that we require.
Assumption A1. Function f (·) is both `-smooth and ρHessian Lipschitz.
The Hessian Lipschitz condition ensures that the function
is well-behaved near a saddle point, and the small perturbation we add will suffice to allow the subsequent gradient
updates to escape from the saddle point. More formally, we
have:
Theorem 3. Assume that f (·) satisfies A1. Then there
exists an absolute constant cmax such that, for any δ >
2
0,  ≤ `ρ , ∆f ≥ f (x0 ) − f ? , and constant c ≤
cmax , PGD(x0 , `, ρ, , c, δ, ∆f ) will output an -secondorder stationary point, with probability 1−δ, and terminate
in the following number of iterations:



d`∆f
`(f (x0 ) − f ? )
4
log
.
O
2
2 δ
1

Note that uniform sampling from a d-dimensional ball can
1
Y
be done efficiently by sampling U d × kYk
where U ∼
Uniform([0, 1]) and Y ∼ N (0, Id ) (Harman & Lacko, 2010).

Strikingly, Theorem 3 shows that perturbed gradient descent finds a second-order stationary point in almost the
same amount of time that gradient descent takes to find
first-order stationary point. The step size η is chosen as
O(1/`) which is in accord with classical analyses of convergence to first-order stationary points. Though we state
the theorem with a certain choice of parameters for simplicity of presentation, our result holds even if we vary the
parameters up to constant factors.
Without loss of generality, we can focus on the case  ≤
`2 /ρ, as in Theorem 3. In the case  > `2 /ρ, standard
gradient descent without perturbation—Theorem 2—easily
solves the problem. This is because by A1, we always have
√
λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≥ −` ≥ − ρ, which means that all second-order stationary points are -first order stationary
points.
We believe that the dependence on at least one log d factor in the iteration complexity is unavoidable in the nonconvex setting, as our result can be directly applied to the
principal component analysis problem, for which the best
known runtimes (for the power method or Lanczos method)
incur a log d factor due to random initialization. Establishing this formally is still an open question however.
To provide some intuition for Theorem 3, consider an iterate xt which is not yet an -second-order stationary point.
By definition, either (1) the gradient ∇f (xt ) is large, or
(2) the Hessian ∇2 f (xt ) has a significant negative eigenvalue. Traditional analysis works in the first case. The
crucial step in the proof of Theorem 3 involves handling
the second case: when the gradient is small k∇f (xt )k ≤
gthres and the Hessian has a significant negative eigenvalue
√
λmin (∇2 f (x̃t )) ≤ − ρ, then adding a perturbation, followed by standard gradient descent for tthres steps, decreases the function value by at least fthres , with high probability. The proof of this fact relies on a novel characterization of geometry around saddle points (see Section 5)
If we are able to make stronger assumptions on the objective function we are able to strengthen our main result. This
further analysis is presented in the next section.
3.1. Functions with Strict Saddle Property
In many real applications, objective functions further admit
the property that all saddle points are strict (Ge et al., 2015;
Sun et al., 2016a;b; Bhojanapalli et al., 2016; Ge et al.,
2016). In this case, all second-order stationary points are
local minima and hence convergence to second-order stationary points (Theorem 3) is equivalent to convergence to
local minima.
To state this result formally, we introduce a robust version
of the strict saddle property (cf. Ge et al., 2015):
Assumption A2. Function f (·) is (θ, γ, ζ)-strict saddle.

How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently

That is, for any x, at least one of following holds:
• k∇f (x)k ≥ θ.
• λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≤ −γ.
• x is ζ-close to X ? — the set of local minima.
Intuitively, the strict saddle assumption states that the Rd
space can be divided into three regions: 1) a region where
the gradient is large; 2) a region where the Hessian has a
significant negative eigenvalue (around saddle point); and
3) the region close to a local minimum. With this assumption, we immediately have the following corollary:
Corollary 4. Let f (·) satisfy A1 and A2. Then, there
exists an absolute constant cmax such that, for any δ >
0, ∆f ≥ f (x0 ) − f ? , constant c ≤ cmax , and letting
˜ = min(θ, γ 2 /ρ), PGD(x0 , `, ρ, ˜, c, δ, ∆f ) will output a
point ζ-close to X ? , with probability 1 − δ, and terminate
in the following number of iterations:



d`∆f
`(f (x0 ) − f ? )
4
log
.
O
˜2
˜2 δ
Corollary 4 shows after finding ˜-second-order stationary
point by Theorem 3 where ˜ = min(θ, γ 2 /ρ), the output is
also in the ζ-neighborhood of some local minimum.
Note although Corollary 4 only explicitly asserts that the
output will lie within some fixed radius ζ from a local
minimum. In many real applications, we further have that
ζ can be written as a function ζ(θ) which decreases linearly or polynomially depending on θ, while γ will be nondecreasing w.r.t θ. In these cases, the above corollary further gives a convergence rate to a local minimum.
3.2. Functions with Strong Local Structure
The convergence rate in Theorem 3 is polynomial in ,
which is similar to that of Theorem 2, but is worse than the
rate of Theorem 1 because of the lack of strong convexity.
Although global strong convexity does not hold in the nonconvex setting that is our focus, in many machine learning
problems the objective function may have a favorable local
structure in the neighborhood of local minima (Ge et al.,
2015; Sun et al., 2016a;b; Sun & Luo, 2016). Exploiting
this property can lead to much faster convergence (linear
convergence) to local minima. One such property that ensures such convergence is a local form of smoothness and
strong convexity:
Assumption A3.a. In a ζ-neighborhood of the set of local
minima X ? , the function f (·) is α-strongly convex, and
β-smooth.
Here we use different letter β to denote the local smoothness parameter (in contrast to the global smoothness parameter `). Note that we always have β ≤ `.

Algorithm 3 Perturbed Gradient Descent with Local Improvement: PGDli(x0 , `, ρ, , c, δ, ∆f , β)
x0 ← PGD(x0 , `, ρ, , c, δ, ∆f )
for t = 0, 1, . . . do
xt+1 ← xt − β1 ∇f (xt )

However, often even local α-strong convexity does not
hold. We thus introduce the following relaxation:
Assumption A3.b. In a ζ-neighborhood of the set of local
minima X ? , the function f (·) satisfies a (α, β)-regularity
condition if for any x in this neighborhood:
h∇f (x), x−PX ? (x)i ≥

α
1
kx − PX ? (x)k2 + k∇f (x)k2 .
2
2β
(1)

Here PX ? (·) is the projection on to the set X ? . Note (α, β)regularity condition is more general and is directly implied
by standard β-smooth and α-strongly convex conditions.
This regularity condition commonly appears in low-rank
problems such as matrix sensing and matrix completion,
and has been used in Bhojanapalli et al. (2016); Zheng &
Lafferty (2016), where local minima form a connected set,
and where the Hessian is strictly positive only with respect
to directions pointing outside the set of local minima.
Gradient descent naturally exploits local structure very
well. In Algorithm 3, we first run Algorithm 2 to output
a point within the neighborhood of a local minimum, and
then perform standard gradient descent with step size β1 .
We can then prove the following theorem:
Theorem 5. Let f (·) satisfy A1, A2, and A3.a (or
A3.b). Then there exists an absolute constant cmax such
that, for any δ > 0,  > 0, ∆f ≥ f (x0 ) − f ? ,
constant c ≤ cmax , and letting ˜ = min(θ, γ 2 /ρ),
PGDli(x0 , `, ρ, ˜, c, δ, ∆f , β) will output a point that is close to X ? , with probability 1−δ, in the following number
of iterations:




`(f (x0 ) − f ? )
d`∆f
β
ζ
4
O
log
+ log
.
˜2
˜2 δ
α

Theorem 5 says that if strong local structure is present,
the convergence rate can be boosted to linear convergence
(log 1 ). In this theorem we see that sequence of iterations
can be decomposed into two phases. In the first phase, perturbed gradient descent finds a ζ-neighborhood by Corollary 4. In the second phase, standard gradient descent takes
us from ζ to -close to a local minimum. Standard gradient descent and Assumption A3.a (or A3.b) make sure that
the iterate never steps out of a ζ-neighborhood in this second phase, giving a result similar to Theorem 1 with linear
convergence.

How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently

4. Example — Matrix Factorization
As a simple example to illustrate how to apply our general theorems to specific non-convex optimization problems, we consider a symmetric low-rank matrix factorization problem, based on the following objective function:
min f (U) =

U∈Rd×r

1
kUU> − M? k2F ,
2

iterations scaling as Õ(r(κ? )4 ). We suspect that this strong
dependence on condition number arises from our generic
assumption that the Hessian Lipschitz is uniformly upper
bounded; it may well be the case that this dependence can
be reduced in the special case of matrix factorization via a
finer analysis of the geometric structure of the problem.

(2)

where M? ∈ Rd×d .
For simplicity, we assume
rank(M? ) = r, and denote σ1? := σ1 (M? ), σr? :=
σr (M? ). Clearly, in this case the global minimum of function value is zero, which is achieved at V? = TD1/2 where
TDT> is the SVD of the symmetric real matrix M? .
The following two lemmas show that the objective function
in Eq. (2) satisfies the geometric assumptions A1, A2,and
A3.b. Moreover, all local minima are global minima.
Lemma 6. For any Γ ≥ σ1? , the function f (U) defined in
Eq. (2) is 8Γ-smooth and 12Γ1/2 -Hessian Lipschitz, inside
the region {U|kUk2 < Γ}.
Lemma 7. For function f (U) defined in Eq. (2), all local minima are global minima. The set of global minima
is X ? = {V? R|RR> = R> R = I}. Furthermore,
1
(σr? )3/2 , 13 σr? , 13 (σr? )1/2 )-strict saddle; and satf (U) is ( 24
2 ?
isfies a ( 3 σr , 10σ1? )-regularity condition in a 31 (σr? )1/2 neighborhood of X ? .
One caveat is that since the objective function is actually
a fourth-order polynomial with respect to U, the smoothness and Hessian Lipschitz parameters from Lemma 6 naturally depend on kUk. Fortunately, we can further show
that gradient descent (even with perturbation) does not increase kUk beyond O(max{kU0 k, (σ1? )1/2 }). Then, applying Theorem 5 gives:
Theorem 8. There exists an absolute constant cmax such
that the following holds. For the objective function in
Eq. (2), for any δ > 0 and constant c ≤ cmax ,
and for Γ1/2 := 2 max{kU0 k, 3(σ1? )1/2 }, the output of
2
(σ ? )2
PGDli(U0 , 8Γ, 12Γ1/2 , 108Γr 1/2 , c, δ, rΓ2 , 10σ1? ), will be close to the global minimum set X ? , with probability 1 − δ,
after the following number of iterations:
!
 4


Γ
dΓ
σ1?
σr?
4
O r
log
+ ? log
.
σr?
δσr?
σr

Theorem 8 establishes global convergence of perturbed
gradient descent from an arbitrary initial point U0 , including exact saddle points. Suppose we initialize at U0 = 0,
then our iteration complexity becomes:

O r(κ? )4 log4 (dκ? /δ) + κ? log(σr? /) ,
where κ? = σ1? /σr? is the condition number of the matrix
M? . We see that in the first phase, to move from a neighborhood of the solution, our method requires a number of

5. Proof Sketch for Theorem 3
In this section we will present the key ideas underlying
the main result of this paper (Theorem 3). We will first
argue the correctness of Theorem 3 given two important
intermediate lemmas. Then we turn to the main lemma,
which establishes that gradient descent can escape from
saddle points quickly. We present full proofs of all these
results in Appendix A. Throughout this section, we use
η, r, gthres , fthres and tthres as defined in Algorithm 2.
5.1. Exploiting Large Gradient or Negative Curvature
Recall that an -second-order stationary point is a point
with a small gradient, and where the Hessian does not
have a significant negative eigenvalue. Suppose we are
currently at an iterate xt that is not an -second-order stationary point; i.e., it does not satisfy the above properties. There are two possibilities: (1) The gradient is large:
k∇f (xt )k ≥ gthres ; or (2) Around the saddle point we have
√
k∇f (xt )k ≤ gthres and λmin (∇2 f (xt )) ≤ − ρ.
The following two lemmas address these two cases respectively. They guarantee that perturbed gradient descent will
decrease the function value in both scenarios.
Lemma 9 (Gradient). Assume that f (·) satisfies A1. Then
for gradient descent with stepsize η < 1` , we have
f (xt+1 ) ≤ f (xt ) − η2 k∇f (xt )k2 .
Lemma 10 (Saddle). (informal) Assume that f (·) satisfies A1, If xt satisfies k∇f (xt )k ≤ gthres and
√
λmin (∇2 f (xt )) ≤ − ρ, then adding one perturbation
step followed by tthres steps of gradient descent, we have
f (xt+tthres ) − f (xt ) ≤ −fthres with high probability.

We see that Algorithm 2 is designed so that Lemma 10
can be directly applied. According to these two lemmas, perturbed gradient descent will decrease the function value either in the case of a large gradient, or around
strict saddle points. Computing the average decrease in
function value yields the total iteration complexity. Since
Algorithm 2 only terminate when the function value decreases too slowly, this guarantees that the output must be
-second-order stationary point (see Appendix A for formal
proofs).

How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently

have a quadratic function), the stuck region Xstuck consists
of points x such that x − x̃ has a small e1 component. This
is a straight band in two dimensions and a flat disk in high
dimensions. However, when the Hessian is not constant,
the shape of the stuck region is distorted. In two dimensions, it forms a “narrow band” as plotted in Figure 2 on
top of the gradient flow. In three dimensions, it forms a
“thin pancake” as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Pertubation ball in 3D and “thin pancake” stuck region

w

Figure 2. “Narrow band” stuck region in 2D under gradient flow

5.2. Escaping from Saddle Points Quickly
The proof of Lemma 9 is straightforward and follows from
traditional analysis. The key technical contribution of this
paper is the proof of Lemma 10, which gives a new characterization of the geometry around saddle points.
Consider a point x̃ that satisfies the the preconditions of
Lemma 10 (k∇f (x̃)k ≤ gthres and λmin (∇2 f (x̃)) ≤
√
− ρ). After adding the perturbation (x0 = x̃+ξ), we can
view x0 as coming from a uniform distribution over Bx̃ (r),
which we call the perturbation ball. We can divide this
perturbation ball Bx̃ (r) into two disjoint regions: (1) an escaping region Xescape which consists of all the points x ∈
Bx̃ (r) whose function value decreases by at least fthres after tthres steps; (2) a stuck region Xstuck = Bx̃ (r) − Xescape .
Our general proof strategy is to show that Xstuck consists of
a very small proportion of the volume of perturbation ball.
After adding a perturbation to x̃, point x0 has a very small
chance of falling in Xstuck , and hence will escape from the
saddle point efficiently.
Let us consider the nature of Xstuck . For simplicity, let us
imagine that x̃ is an exact saddle point whose Hessian has
only one negative eigenvalue, and d − 1 positive eigenvalues. Let us denote the minimum eigenvalue direction as
e1 . In this case, if the Hessian remains constant (and we

The major challenge here is to bound the volume of this
high-dimensional non-flat “pancake” shaped region Xstuck .
A crude approximation of this “pancake” by a flat “disk”
loses polynomial factors in the dimensionalilty, which
gives a suboptimal rate. Our proof relies on the following
crucial observation: Although we do not know the explicit
form of the stuck region, we know it must be very “thin,”
therefore it cannot have a large volume. The informal statement of the lemma is as follows:
Lemma 11. (informal) Suppose x̃ satisfies the precondition of Lemma 10, and let e1 be the smallest eigendirection of ∇2 f (x̃). For any δ ∈ (0, 1/3] and any two
√ points
w, u ∈ Bx̃ (r), if w − u = µre1 and µ ≥ δ/(2 d), then
at least one of w, u is not in the stuck region Xstuck .
Using this lemma it is not hard to bound the volume of
the stuck region: we can draw a straight line along the e1
direction which intersects the perturbation ball (shown as
purple line segment in Figure 2). For√any two points on
this line segment that are at least δr/(2 d) away from each
other (shown as red points w, u in Figure 2), by Lemma 11,
we know at least one of them must not be in Xstuck . This
implies if there is one point ũ ∈ Xstuck on this line segment,
then√Xstuck on this line can be at most an interval of length
δr/ d around ũ. This establishes the “thickness” of Xstuck
in the e1 direction, which is turned into an upper bound on
the volume of the stuck region Xstuck by standard calculus.

6. Conclusion
This paper presents the first (nearly) dimension-free result
for gradient descent in a general non-convex setting. We
present a general convergence result and show how it can
be further strengthened when combined with further structure such as strict saddle conditions and/or local regularity/convexity.
There are still many related open problems. First, in the
presence of constraints, it is worthwhile to study whether
gradient descent still admits similar sharp convergence results. Another important question is whether similar techniques can be applied to accelerated gradient descent. We
hope that this result could serve as a first step towards a
more general theory with strong, almost dimension free
guarantees for non-convex optimization.

How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently

References
Agarwal, Naman, Allen-Zhu, Zeyuan, Bullins, Brian,
Hazan, Elad, and Ma, Tengyu. Finding approximate local minima for nonconvex optimization in linear time.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01146, 2016.
Bhojanapalli, Srinadh, Neyshabur, Behnam, and Srebro,
Nathan. Global optimality of local search for low
rank matrix recovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07221,
2016.
Bubeck, Sébastien et al. Convex optimization: Algorithms
R in Machine
and complexity. Foundations and Trends
Learning, 8(3-4):231–357, 2015.
Candes, Emmanuel J, Li, Xiaodong, and Soltanolkotabi,
Mahdi. Phase retrieval via wirtinger flow: Theory and
algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
61(4):1985–2007, 2015.
Carmon, Yair and Duchi, John C. Gradient descent efficiently finds the cubic-regularized non-convex newton
step. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.00547, 2016.
Carmon, Yair, Duchi, John C, Hinder, Oliver, and Sidford,
Aaron. Accelerated methods for non-convex optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.00756, 2016.
Choromanska, Anna, Henaff, Mikael, Mathieu, Michael,
Arous, Gérard Ben, and LeCun, Yann. The loss surface
of multilayer networks. arXiv:1412.0233, 2014.
Curtis, Frank E, Robinson, Daniel P, and Samadi, Mohammadreza. A trust region algorithm with a worst-case iteration complexity of\ mathcal {O}(\ epsilonˆ{-3/2}) for
nonconvex optimization. Mathematical Programming,
pp. 1–32, 2014.
Dauphin, Yann N, Pascanu, Razvan, Gulcehre, Caglar,
Cho, Kyunghyun, Ganguli, Surya, and Bengio, Yoshua.
Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in
high-dimensional non-convex optimization. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2933–
2941, 2014.
Ge, Rong, Huang, Furong, Jin, Chi, and Yuan, Yang. Escaping from saddle points—online stochastic gradient
for tensor decomposition. In COLT, 2015.
Ge, Rong, Lee, Jason D, and Ma, Tengyu. Matrix completion has no spurious local minimum. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2973–2981,
2016.
Harman, Radoslav and Lacko, Vladimı́r. On decompositional algorithms for uniform sampling from n-spheres
and n-balls. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 101(10):
2297–2304, 2010.

Jain, Prateek, Jin, Chi, Kakade, Sham M, and Netrapalli,
Praneeth. Computing matrix squareroot via non convex
local search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.05854, 2015.
Kawaguchi, Kenji. Deep learning without poor local minima. In Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 586–594, 2016.
Lee, Jason D, Simchowitz, Max, Jordan, Michael I, and
Recht, Benjamin. Gradient descent only converges to
minimizers. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
1246–1257, 2016.
Levy, Kfir Y. The power of normalization: Faster evasion of
saddle points. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.04831, 2016.
Nesterov, Yu. Introductory lectures on convex programming volume i: Basic course. Lecture notes, 1998.
Nesterov, Yurii and Polyak, Boris T. Cubic regularization
of newton method and its global performance. Mathematical Programming, 108(1):177–205, 2006.
Netrapalli, Praneeth, Jain, Prateek, and Sanghavi, Sujay.
Phase retrieval using alternating minimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
2796–2804, 2013.
Park, Dohyung, Kyrillidis, Anastasios, Caramanis, Constantine, and Sanghavi, Sujay. Non-square matrix
sensing without spurious local minima via the burermonteiro approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03240,
2016.
Rumelhart, David E, Hinton, Geoffrey E, and Williams,
Ronald J. Learning representations by back-propagating
errors. Cognitive modeling, 5, 1988.
Sun, Ju, Qu, Qing, and Wright, John. Complete dictionary
recovery over the sphere i: Overview and the geometric picture. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
2016a.
Sun, Ju, Qu, Qing, and Wright, John. A geometric analysis of phase retrieval. In Information Theory (ISIT),
2016 IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 2379–2383.
IEEE, 2016b.
Sun, Ruoyu and Luo, Zhi-Quan. Guaranteed matrix completion via non-convex factorization. IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, 62(11):6535–6579, 2016.
Zheng, Qinqing and Lafferty, John. Convergence analysis
for rectangular matrix completion using burer-monteiro
factorization and gradient descent.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.07051, 2016.

