Co-clustering through Optimal Transport

Charlotte Laclau 1 Ievgen Redko 2 Basarab Matei 1 Younès Bennani 1 Vincent Brault 3

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel method for
co-clustering, an unsupervised learning approach
that aims at discovering homogeneous groups of
data instances and features by grouping them simultaneously. The proposed method uses the entropy regularized optimal transport between empirical measures defined on data instances and
features in order to obtain an estimated joint
probability density function represented by the
optimal coupling matrix. This matrix is further factorized to obtain the induced row and
columns partitions using multiscale representations approach. To justify our method theoretically, we show how the solution of the regularized optimal transport can be seen from the variational inference perspective thus motivating its
use for co-clustering. The algorithm derived for
the proposed method and its kernelized version
based on the notion of Gromov-Wasserstein distance are fast, accurate and can determine automatically the number of both row and column
clusters. These features are vividly demonstrated
through extensive experimental evaluations.

1. Introduction
Cluster analysis aims to gather data instances into groups,
called clusters, where instances within one group are similar among themselves while instances in different groups
are as dissimilar as possible. Clustering methods have become more and more popular recently due to their ability
to provide new insights into unlabeled data that may be
difficult or even impossible to capture for a human being.
1

CNRS, LIPN, Université Paris 13 - Sorbonne Paris Cité,
France 2 CNRS UMR 5220 - INSERM U1206, Univ. Lyon 1,
INSA Lyon, F-69621 Villeurbanne, France 3 CNRS, LJK, Univ.
Grenoble-Alpes, France. Correspondence to: Charlotte Laclau
<charlotte.laclauc@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).
0
The first author of this paper is now a post-doc in CNRS,
LIG, Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, France

Clustering methods, however, do not take into account the
possible existing relationships between the features that describe the data instances. For example, one may consider
a data matrix extracted from text corpus where each document is described by the terms appearing in it. In this
case, clustering documents may benefit from the knowledge about the correlation that exists between different
terms revealing their probability of appearing in the same
documents. This idea is the cornerstone of co-clustering
(Hartigan, 1972; Mirkin, 1996) where the goal is to perform clustering of both data points and features simultaneously. The obtained latent structure of data is composed of blocks usually called co-clusters. Applications of
co-clustering include but are not limited to recommendation systems (George & Merugu, 2005; Deodhar & Ghosh,
2010; Xu et al., 2012), gene expression analysis (Cheng
et al., 2008; Hanisch et al., 2002) and text mining (Dhillon
et al., 2003a; Wang et al., 2009). As a result, these methods
are of an increasing interest to the data mining community.
Co-clustering methods are often distinguished into probabilistic methods (e.g., (Dhillon et al., 2003b; Banerjee
et al., 2007; Nadif & Govaert, 2008; Wang et al., 2009;
Shan & Banerjee, 2010)) and metric based (e.g., (Rocci
& Vichi, 2008; Ding et al., 2006)) methods. Probabilistic
methods usually make an assumption that data was generated as a mixture of probability density functions where
each one of them corresponds to one co-cluster. The goal
then is to estimate the parameters of the underlying distributions and the posterior probabilities of each co-cluster
given the data. Metric based approaches proceed in a different way and rely on introducing and optimizing a criterion commonly taking into account intra- and inter-block
variances. This criterion, in its turn, is defined using some
proper metric function that describes the geometry of data
in the most precise way possible. Both metric and probabilistic approaches are known to have their own advantages
and limitations: despite being quite efficient in modeling
the data distribution, probabilistic methods are computationally demanding and hardly scalable; metric methods
are less computationally demanding but present the need to
choose the “right” distance that uncovers the underlying latent co-clusters’ structure based on available data. Furthermore, the vast majority of co-clustering methods require
the number of co-clusters to be set in advance. This is usu-

Co-clustering through Optimal Transport

ally done using the computationally expensive exhaustive
search over a large number of possible pairs of row and
column clusters as in (Keribin et al., 2015; Wyse & Friel,
2012; Wyse et al., 2014).

substantially more efficient than the other state-of-the-art
methods. Last section concludes the paper and gives a couple of hints for possible future research.

In this paper, we address the existing issues of co-clustering
methods described above by proposing a principally new
approach that efficiently solves the co-clustering problem
from both qualitative and computational points of view
and allows the automatic detection of the number of coclusters. We pose the co-clustering problem as the task of
transporting the empirical measure defined on the data instances to the empirical measure defined on the data features. The intuition behind this process is very natural to
co-clustering and consists in capturing the associations between instances and features of the data matrix. The solution of optimal transportation problem is given by a doublystochastic coupling matrix which can be considered as the
approximated joint probability distribution of the original
data. Furthermore, the coupling matrix can be factorized
into three terms where one of them reflects the posterior
distribution of data given co-clusters while two others represent the approximated distributions of data instances and
features. We use these approximated distributions to obtain
the final partitions. We also derive a kernelized version of
our method that contrary to the original case, is based on
an optimal transportation metric defined on the space of
dissimilarity functions.

2. Background and notations

The main novelty of our work is two-fold. To the best
of our knowledge, the proposed approach is a first attempt to apply entropy regularized optimal transport for coclustering and to give its solution a co-clustering interpretation. While Wasserstein distance has already been adapted
to design clustering algorithms (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014; Irpino et al., 2014), our idea is to concentrate our attention on
the solution of the optimal transport given by the coupling
matrix and not to minimize the quantization error with respect to (w.r.t.) Wasserstein distance. We also note that
using entropy regularization leads to a very efficient algorithm that can be easily parallelized (Cuturi, 2013). Second, we show that under some plausible assumptions the
density estimation procedure appearing from the use of the
optimal transport results in the variational inference problem with the minimization of the reversed Kullback-Leibler
divergence. The important implications of this difference
w.r.t. other existing methods are explained in Section 3.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we briefly present the discrete version of the optimal
transportation problem and its entropy regularized version.
Section 3 proceeds with the description of the proposed approach, its theoretical analysis and algorithmic implementation. In Section 4, we evaluate our approach on synthetic
and real-world data sets and show that it is accurate and

In this section, we present the formalization of the MongeKantorovich (Kantorovich, 1942) optimization problem
and its entropy regularized version.
2.1. Optimal transport
Optimal transportation theory was first introduced in
(Monge, 1781) to study the problem of resource allocation.
Assuming that we have a set of factories and a set of mines,
the goal of optimal transportation is to move the ore from
mines to factories in an optimal way, i.e., by minimizing
the overall transport cost.
More formally,
probability
measures1
PNSgiven two empirical
PNT
1
1
µ̂S = NS i=1 δxSi and µ̂T = NT i=1 δxTi defined as
uniformly weighted sums of Dirac with mass at locations
NS
supported on two point sets XS = {xSi ∈ Rd }i=1
and
T
d NT
XT = {xi ∈ R }i=1 , the Monge-Kantorovich problem
consists in finding a probabilistic coupling γ defined as a
joint probability measure over XS × XT with marginals
µ̂S and µ̂T that minimizes the cost of transport w.r.t. some
metric l : Xs × Xt → R+ :
min
γ∈Π(µ̂S ,µ̂T )

hM, γiF

where h·,·iF is the Frobenius dot product, Π(µ̂S , µ̂T ) =
S ×NT
{γ ∈ RN
|γ1 = µ̂S , γ T 1 = µ̂T } is a set of doubly
+
stochastic matrices and M is a dissimilarity matrix, i.e.,
Mij = l(xSi , xTj ), defining the energy needed to move a
probability mass from xSi to xTj . This problem admits a
unique solution γ ∗ and defines a metric on the space of
probability measures (called the Wasserstein distance) as
follows:
W (µ̂S , µ̂T ) =

min

hM, γiF .

γ∈Π(µ̂S ,µ̂T )

The Wasserstein distance has been successfully used in various applications, for instance: computer vision (Rubner
et al., 2000), texture analysis (Rabin et al., 2011), tomographic reconstruction (I. Abraham & Carlier, 2016), domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2014), metric learning (Cuturi & Avis, 2014) and clustering (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014;
Irpino et al., 2014). This latter application is of a particular
interest as Wasserstein distance is known to be a very efficient metric due to its capability of taking into account the
1
Due space limitation, we present only the discrete version
of optimal transport. For more details on the general continuous
case and the convergence of empirical measures, we refer the interested reader to the excellent monograph by (Villani, 2009).

Co-clustering through Optimal Transport

geometry of data through the pairwise distances between
samples. The success of algorithms based on this distance
is also due to (Cuturi, 2013) who introduced an entropy regularized version of optimal transport that can be optimized
efficiently using matrix scaling algorithm. We present this
regularization below.
2.2. Entropic regularization
The idea of using entropic regularization dates back to
(Schrödinger, 1931). In (Cuturi, 2013), it found its application to the optimal transportation problem through the
following objective function:
min
γ∈Π(µ̂S ,µ̂T )

hM, γiF −

1
E(γ).
λ

PN ,N
Second term E(γ) = − i,jS T γi,j log(γi,j ) in this
equation allows to obtain smoother and more numerically
stable solutions compared to the original case and converges to it at the exponential rate (Benamou et al., 2015).
Another advantage of entropic regularization is that it allows to solve optimal transportation problem efficiently using Sinkhorn-Knopp matrix scaling algorithm (Sinkhorn &
Knopp, 1967).
In the next section, we explain the main underlying idea
of our approach that consists in associating data instances
with features through regularized optimal transport.

3. Co-clustering through optimal transport
In this section we show how the co-clustering problem can
be casted in a principally new way and then solved using
the ideas from the optimal transportation theory.

To use discrete optimal transport, we also define two empirical measures
µ̂r and µ̂c based P
on X and Y as follows:
Pn
m
1
µ̂r = n1 i=1 δxi and µ̂c = m
i=1 δyi . We are now
ready to present our method.
3.2. Proposed approach
The main underlying idea of our approach is to use the optimal transportation presented above to find a probabilistic coupling of the empirical measures defined based on
rows and columns of a given data matrix. More formally,
for some fixed λ > 0 we solve the co-clustering problem
through the following optimization procedure:
γλ∗ = argminγ∈Π(µ̂r ,µ̂c ) hM, γiF −

(1)

where the matrix M is computed using the Euclidean distance, i.e., Mij = kxi − yj k2 . The elements of the resulting matrix γλ∗ provides us with the weights of associations
between instances and features: similar instances and features correspond to higher values in γλ∗ . Our intuition is to
use these weights to identify the most similar sets of rows
and columns that should be grouped together to form coclusters.
Following (Benamou et al., 2015), this optimization problem can be equivalently rewritten in the following way:
min

hM, γiF −

γ∈Π(µ̂r ,µ̂c )

1
1
E(γ) =
min KL(γkξλ ),
λ
λ γ∈Π(µ̂r ,µ̂c )

where ξλ = e−λM is the Gibbs kernel.
Finally, we can rewrite the last expression as follows:
min

3.1. Problem setup

1
E(γ),
λ

γ∈Π(µ̂r ,µ̂c )

KL(γkξλ ) = min KL(γkξλ ),
γ∈C

Let us denote by X and Y two random variables taking values in the sets {xr }nr=1 and {yc }dc=1 , respectively,
where subscripts r and c correspond to rows (instances) and
columns (features). Similar to (Dhillon et al., 2003b), we
assume that the joint probability distribution between X
and Y denoted by p(X, Y ) is estimated from the data matrix A ∈ Rn×d . We further assume that X and Y consist
of instances that are distributed w.r.t. probability measures
µr , µc supported on Ωr , Ωc where Ωr ⊆ Rd and Ωr ⊆ Rn ,
respectively.

where C = C1 ∩ C2 is the intersection of closed convex subsets given by C1 = {γ ∈ Rd×d |γ1 = µ̂r } and
C2 = {γ ∈ Rd×d |γ T 1 = µ̂c }. The solution of the
entropy regularized optimal transport can be obtained using Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm and has the following form
(Benamou et al., 2015):

The problem of co-clustering consists in jointly grouping the set of features and the set of instances into homogeneous blocks by finding two assignment functions
Cr and Cc that map as follows: Cr : {x1 , . . . , xn } →
{x̂1 , . . . , x̂g }, Cc : {y1 , . . . , yd } → {ŷ1 , . . . , ŷm } where g
and m denote the number of row and columns clusters, and
discrete random variables X̂ and Ŷ represent the partitions
induced by X and Y , i.e., X̂ = Cr (X) = and Ŷ = Cc (Y ).

In what follows, we show that under some plausible assumptions, we can interpret these two vectors as approximated rows and columns probability density functions.

γλ∗ = diag(α)ξλ diag(β),

(2)

where α and β are the scaling coefficients of the Gibbs
kernel ξλ .

3.3. Connection to variational inference
In order to justify our approach from the theoretical point
of view, we first explain how the obtained solution γ ∗

Co-clustering through Optimal Transport

can be used for co-clustering. As mentioned in (Dhillon
et al., 2003b) and later in (Banerjee et al., 2007), the
co-clustering can be seen as a density estimation problem where the goal is to approximate the real density
p(X, Y ) by a simpler one depending on the obtained
co-clustering in a way that it preserves the loss in the
mutual information given by I(X, Y ) − I(X̂, Ŷ ) where
R
p(x,y)
dxdy is the mutual inI(X, Y ) = XY p(x, y) log p(x)p(y)
formation. This quantity is further shown to be equal to the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the original distribution p(X, Y ) and q(X, Y ) where the latter has the following form:

where the optimal coupling γ equals to the estimated joint
probability q(X̂, Ŷ ).

q(x, y) = p(y|ŷ)p(x̂, ŷ)p(x|x̂).

To this end, we propose to consider the factorization of
q(x̂, ŷ) that has the following form

From this point, one may instantly see that the solution of
the optimal transport problem γ ∗ has a very similar form
as it also represents the joint probability distribution that
approximates the original probability distribution p(x, y)
given by the Gibbs measure ξλ and also factorizes into three
terms. The most important difference, however, lies in the
asymmetry of the KL divergence: while (Dhillon et al.,
2003b) and (Banerjee et al., 2007) concentrate on minimizing KL(p(X, Y )kq(X, Y )), our idea is different and
consists in minimizing KL(q(X, Y )kp(X, Y )). This approach is known in the literature as the variational inference
(Bishop, 2006) and exhibits a totally different behaviour
compared to the minimization of KL(p(X, Y )kq(X, Y )).
As shown by (Bishop, 2006), in variational inference the
estimated distribution q(X, Y ) concentrates on the modes
of data and remains compact, while the minimizer of
KL(p(X, Y )kq(X, Y )) tends to cover the whole surface of
the original density and to overestimate its support. As X,
Y and X̂ and Ŷ represent the observed and unobserved
variables, respectively, the natural goal is to try to estimate the distribution p(X, Y |X̂, Ŷ ) of the data given the
obtained co-clusters by the simpler variational distribution
q(X, Y ). However, as the maximisation of p(X, Y |X̂, Ŷ )
is computationally impossible, it is common to introduce a
b and Yb in order
free distribution q(·, ·) on the parameters X
to obtain the following decomposition:
log p(X, Y ) = L(q(X̂, Ŷ ))+KL(q(X̂, Ŷ )kp(X̂, Ŷ |X, Y )),
where the lower bound
Z
Z
L(q(X̂, Ŷ )) =
x̂∈X̂

ŷ∈Ŷ

q(x̂, ŷ) log

p(x, y, x̂, ŷ)
dx̂dŷ
q(x̂, ŷ)

is maximized when the KL divergence is minimized.
Now, if we assume that p(X̂, Ŷ |X, Y ) follows the Gibbs
distribution, i.e. p(X̂, Ŷ |X, Y ) ∝ e−λM (x,y) , we can consider the original formulation of the regularized optimal
transport as the variational inference problem:
min KL(q(X̂, Ŷ )kp(X̂, Ŷ |X, Y )) = min KL(γkξλ ),
q

γ

At this point, we know that the coupling matrix can be seen
as an approximation to the original unknown posterior density function but the question how one can use it to obtain
the clustering of rows and columns has not been answered
yet. In order to solve the variational inference problem,
it is usually assumed that the variables x̂, ŷ are independent and thus the variational distribution q(x̂, ŷ) factorizes
as q(x̂, ŷ) = q(x̂)q(ŷ). This assumption, however, goes
against the whole idea of co-clustering that relies on the existence of a deep connection between these two variables.

q(x̂, ŷ) = q(x)q(x̂, ŷ|x, y)q(y).
This particular form follows the idea of structured stochastic variational inference proposed in (Hoffman & Blei,
2015) where a term depicting the conditional distribution
between hidden and observed variables is added to the fully
factorized traditional setting presented above. As stated in
(Hoffman & Blei, 2015), this term allows arbitrary dependencies between observed and hidden variables which can
increase the fidelity of the approximation.
Following (Bishop, 2006), the optimal estimated densities
q(x) and q(y) are controlled by the direction of the smallest variance of p(x) and p(y) respectively. Furthermore,
q(x) and q(y) are proportional to the joint densities p(ŷ, y)
and p(x̂, x), i.e., q(x) ∝ p(ŷ, y) and q(y) ∝ p(x̂, x). Bearing in mind the equivalence between γλ∗ and q(x̂, ŷ), this
brings us to the following important conclusions: (1) the
matrices diag(α) and diag(β) can be seen as the approximated densities p(Ŷ , Y ) and p(X̂, X); (2) vectors α and
β represent the approximated densities p(X) and p(Y ) obtained by summing X and Y out of p(X̂, X) and p(Ŷ , Y ),
respectively.
According to (Laird, 1978), the non-parametric estimate of
the mixing distribution is a piecewise step function where
the number of steps depend on the number of components
in the mixture. In the cluster analysis, we can assume that
p(X) and p(Y ) consist of g and m components, respectively. Then, our goal is to detect these steps based on the
estimates given by α and β to obtain the desired partitions.
3.4. Kernelized version and Gromov-Wasserstein
distance
In this part, we introduce the kernelized version of our
method and compare it to the original formulation of our
algorithm. In order to proceed, we first define two similarity matrices Kr ∈ Rn×n and Kc ∈ Rd×d associated
to empirical measures µ̂r , µ̂c thus forming metric-measure

Co-clustering through Optimal Transport

spaces as in (Mémoli, 2011). Matrices Kr and Kc are defined by calculating the pairwise distances or similarities
between rows and columns, respectively, without the restriction of them being positive or calculated based on a
proper distance function satisfying the triangle inequality.
The entropic Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy in this case
is defined as follows (Peyré et al., 2016):
GW(Kr , Kc , µ̂r , µ̂c ) = min ΓKr ,Kc (γ) − λE(γ)
γ∈Πµ̂r ,µ̂c
X
= min
L(Kri,j , Kck,l )γi,j γk,l − λE(γ).
T ∈Πµ̂r ,µ̂c

i,j,k,l

where γ is a coupling matrix between two similarity matrices and L : R × R → R+ is an arbitrary lost-function,
usually the quadratic-loss or Kullback-Leibler divergence.
Based on this definition, one may define the problem of the
entropic Gromov-Wasserstein barycenters for similarity or
distance matrices Kr and Kc as follows:
X
εi ΓK,Ki (γi ) − λE(γi )
min
(3)
K,γr ,γc

i={r,c}

where K is the computed barycenter and γr ∈ Πµ̂,µ̂r , γc ∈
Πµ̂,µ̂c are the coupling matrices that align it with Kr and
Kc , respectively.
P εi are the weighting coefficients summing
to one, i.e., i={r,c} εi = 1 that determine our interest in
more accurate alignment between Kr and K or Kc and K.
The intuition behind this optimization procedure for coclustering with respect to original formulation given in (1)
is the following: while in (1) we align rows with columns
directly, in (3) our goal is to do it via an intermediate representation given by the barycenter K that is optimally
aligned with both Kr and Kc . In this case, we obtain the
solutions γr and γc that, similar to (2), can be decomposed
as follows:
γr∗ = diag(αr )ξr diag(βr ), γc∗ = diag(αc )ξc diag(βc )
where ξr = e−λMr and ξc = e−λMc are Gibbs kernels calculated between the barycenter and row and column similarity matrices using any arbitrary loss-function L as explained before. Finally, based on the analysis presented
above, we further use vectors βr and βc to derive row and
column partitions.
3.5. Detecting the number of clusters
In order to detect the steps (or jumps) in the approximated
marginals, we propose to adapt a procedure introduced
in (Matei & Meignen, 2012) for multiscale denoising of
piecewise smooth signals. This method is of particular interest for us as it determines the significant jumps in the
vectors α and β without knowing their number and location, nor a specific threshold to decide the significance

of a jump. As the proposed procedure deals with nondecreasing functions, we first sort the values of α and β
in the ascending order. Since the procedure is identical for
both vectors, we only describe it for the vector α.
We consider that the elements {αi }ni=1 of α are the local
averages of a piecewise continuous function v : [0, 1[⊂
R → R on the intervals Iin = [i/n, (i + 1)/n[ defined by
the uniform subdivision Rof step 1/n of the interval [0, 1[.
More precisely: αin = n I n v(t)dt, i = 0, . . . , n − 1. The
i
detection strategy
is based on the following cost function:
P
i
n
n
F (Iin ) =
l=i−1 |αl+1 − αl | defined for each interval.
Therefore, we get the list of the interval suspicious to contain a jump for the subdivision of order n as follows:
Ln = {i∗ ; i∗ = argmaxi F(Ini )}.
This detection should be refined in order to get only significant jumps in our vector α. To this end we use the multiscale representation of α as in (Harten, 1989) and we perform this detection on each scale. On the first scale, we get
a coarse version of α by averaging:
1 n
n
(α + α2i+1
), i = 0, . . . , n/2 − 1.
2 2i
Now, by considering the coarse version of α, we obtain a
second list Ln/2 of suspicious intervals as before. After
that, these two lists merge in the list Ljumps as follows: a
n
n
jump will be considered in the interval I2i
or I2i+1
if the
n/2
interval Ii
is also detected as suspicious at the coarse
scale. This procedure is iterated [log2 n] times and a jump
is observed if a chain of detection exists from fine to coarse
scales. Finally, the number of clusters is obtained by g =
|Ljumps | + 1.
n/2

αi

=

3.6. Algorithmic implementation
We now briefly summarize the main steps of both CCOT
and CCOT-GW methods and discuss their peculiarities with
respect to each other. The pseudocode of both approaches
in Matlab are presented in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2,
respectively.
CCOT First step of our algorithm consists in calculating
the cost matrix M and using it to obtain the optimal coupling matrix γλ∗ by applying the regularized optimal transport. In order to calculate M , row and column instances
should both lie in a space of the same dimension. This condition, however, is verified only if the matrix A is squared
which occurs rarely in the real-world applications. To overcome this issue, we first subsample the original data set A
in a way that allows us to equalize the number of rows and
columns and operate with two sets of the same dimension.
If we assume that n > d then this new reduced data set is
denoted by D ∈ Rd×d . We repeat the sampling procedure
until every individual is picked at least once.

Co-clustering through Optimal Transport

The next step is to perform for each i = 1, . . . , ns the jump
detection on the sorted vectors αi and βi to obtain two lists
βi
i
of the jumps locations Lα
jumps and Ljumps and to define the
number of row and column clusters g and m. By using
them, we obtain the resulting row partition:

i
1, r ≤ Lα

jumps (1)



 ...
αi
i
k, Lα
Cri (xr ) =
jumps (k − 1) < r ≤ Ljumps (k)


...


 αi
αi
i
|Ljumps | + 1, r > Lα
jumps (|Ljumps |).
The partition for columns Cci (yc ) is obtained in the same
way. Finally, we apply the majority vote over all samples
partitions to obtain Cr and Cc . Regarding complexity, both
Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm used to solve the regularized
optimal transport (Knight, 2008) and the proposed jump
detection techniques are known to converge at the linear
rate multiplied by the number of samples, i.e., O(ns d). On
the other hand, the calculation of modes of the clustering
obtained on the generated samples for both features and
data instances has the complexity O(ns (n+d)). In the end,
the complexity of the whole algorithm is O(ns (n + d)).
We also note that in the real-world applications, we usually deal with scenarios where n  d (“big data”) or
d  n (“small” data) thus reducing the overall complexity to O(ns n) and O(ns d), respectively. This makes our
approach even more computationally attractive.
Algorithm 1 Co-clustering through Optimal Transport
(CCOT)
Input : A - data matrix, λ - regularization parameter, ns - number of sampling
Output: Cr , Cc - partition matrices for rows and columns, g, m number of row and column clusters
[n, d] = size(Z)
for i = 1 to ns do
Di = datasample(Z, d)
Mi ← pdist2(Di , DTi )
[αi , βi , γ ∗ ] ← optimal transport(Mi , λ)
i
i
[Lα
jumps , Cr , g] ← jump detection(sort(αi ))
βi
[Ljumps , Cic , m] ← jump detection(sort(βi ))

Algorithm 2 Co-clustering through Optimal Transport
with Gromov-Wasserstein barycenters (CCOT-GW)
Input : A - data matrix, λ - regularization parameter, εr , εc weights for barycenter calculation
Output: Cr , Cc - partition matrices for rows and columns, g, m number of row and column clusters
Kr ← pdist2(Z, Z)
Kc ← pdist2(ZT , ZT )
[βr , βc , γr∗ , γc∗ ] ← gw barycenter(Kr , Kc , λ, εr , εc )
r
, Cr , g] ← jump detection(sort(βr ))
[Lβjumps
βc
[Ljumps , Cc , m] ← jump detection(sort(βc ))

4. Experimental evaluations
In this section, we provide empirical evaluation for the proposed algorithms.
4.1. Synthetic data
Simulation setting We simulate data following the generative process of the Gaussian Latent Block Models (for
details see (Govaert & Nadif, 2013)) and we consider four
scenarios with different number of co-clusters, degree of
separation and size. Table 1 and Figure 1 present the characteristics of theta simulated data sets and their visualization showing the different co-clustering structures.
Table 1. Size (n × d), number of co-clusters (g × m), degree of
overlapping ([+] for well-separated and [++] for ill-separated coclusters) and the proportions of co-clusters for simulated data sets.
Data set
D1
D2
D3
D4

n×d
600 × 300
600 × 300
300 × 200
300 × 300

g×m
3×3
3×3
2×4
5×4

Overlapping
[+]
[+]
[++]
[++]

Proportions
Equal
Unequal
Equal
Unequal

Cr ← mode(Cir )
Cc ← mode(Cic )

CCOT-GW As it can be seen from Algorithm 2,
CCOT-GW allows to overcome the important disadvantage
of CCOT that consists in the need to perform sampling to
cluster all data objects. On the other hand, the computational complexity of CCOT is only O(ns d), while for
CCOT-GW it scales as O(n2 d + d2 n). We also note that
CCOT-GW offers a great flexibility in terms of the possible data representation used at its input. One may easily
consider using any arbitrary kernel function to calculate
similarity matrices or even learn them beforehand using
multiple-kernel learning approaches.

(a) D2

(b) D3

(c) D4

Figure 1. D2, D3 and D4 reorganized w.r.t. the true partitions.

We use several state-of-the-art co-clustering algorithms as
baselines including ITCC (Dhillon et al., 2003b), Double
K-Means (DKM) (Rocci & Vichi, 2008), Orthogonal Nonnegative Matrix Tri-Factorizations (ONTMF) (Ding et al.,
2006), the Gaussian Latent Block Models (GLBM) (Nadif
& Govaert, 2008; Govaert & Nadif, 2013) and Residual
Bayesian Co-Clustering (RBC) (Shan & Banerjee, 2010).

Co-clustering through Optimal Transport
Table 2. Mean (± standard-deviation) of the co-clustering error (CCE) obtained for all configurations. “-” indicates that the algorithm
cannot find a partition with the requested number of co-clusters. P-values obtained using the non-parametric test of Wilcoxon (Wilcoxon,
1945) that imply significant differences are printed in bold (significance level of 0.05).
Data set
D1
D2
D3
D4

K-means
.018 ± .003
.072 ± .044
–
.126 ± .038

NMF
.042 ± .037
.083 ± .063
–
–

DKM
.025 ± .048
.038 ± .000
.310 ± .000
.145 ± .082

Tri-NMF
.082 ± .063
.052 ± .065
–
–

Algorithms
GLBM
.021 ± .011
.032 ± .041
.262 ± .022
.115 ± .047

ITCC
.021 ± .001
.047 ± .042
.241 ± .031
.121 ± .075

RBC
.017 ± .045
.039 ± .052
–
.102 ± .071

CCOT
.018 ± .013
.023 ± .036
.031 ± .027
.093 ± .032

CCOT-GW
.004 ± .002
.011 ± .056
.008 ± .001
.079 ± .031

We also report the results of K-means and NMF, run on
both modes of the data matrix, as clustering baseline. To
assess the performance of all compared methods, we compute the co-clustering error (CCE) (Patrikainen & Meila,
2006) defined as follows:

of these vectors, obtained with CCOT, with their elements
sorted in the ascending order reveal clear steps that correspond to the correct number of clusters and also illustrate
their proportions and the degree of overlapping. The same
observation is valid for CCOT-GW. Both approaches correctly identified the number of clusters in most cases and
CCE((z, w), (ẑ, ŵ)) = e(z, ẑ)+e(w, ŵ)−e(z, ẑ)×e(w, ŵ), CCOT is slightly more accurate than CCOT-GW when the
proportions of co-clusters are unbalanced.
where ẑ and ŵ are the partitions of instances and variables
estimated by the algorithm; z and w are the true partitions
and e(z, ẑ) (resp. e(w, ŵ)) denotes the error rate, i.e., the
proportion of misclassified instances (resp. features).
−5

2.5026

x 10

1.002

1.0015

2.5024

1.001

α

β

2.5022

For all configurations, we generate 100 data sets and compute the mean and standard deviation of the CCE over all
sets. As all the approaches we compared with are very
sensitive to the initialization, we run them 50 times with
random initializations and retain the best result according
to the corresponding criterion. RBC is initialized with Kmeans. Regarding CCOT we set ns to 1000 for all configurations except D4 which has the same number of rows
and columns, and therefore does not require any sampling.
For CCOT-GW, we use Gaussian kernels for both rows and
columns with σ computed as the mean of all pairwise Euclidean distances between vectors (Kar & Jain, 2011). Finally, we let both CCOT and CCOT-GW detect automatically the number of co-clusters, while for all other algorithms we set the number of clusters to its true value.
Co-clustering performance We report the mean (and
standard deviation) of co-clustering errors obtained in Table 2. Based on these results, we observe that on D1, which
has a clear block structure, all algorithms perform equally
well, however CCOT-GW gives the best results, closely followed by CCOT and K-means. Regarding D2, D3 and
D4, which have more complicated structure than D1, both
CCOT and CCOT-GW significantly outperform all other algorithms and this difference is all the more important on D3
and D4 where some of the compared algorithms are unable
to find a partition with the desired number of clusters.
Furthermore, we argued that one of the strengths of our
method is its ability to detect automatically the number
of co-clusters by applying a jump detection algorithm on
α and β. From Figure 2 one can observe that the plots

1.0005

2.502
1
2.5018
2.5016
0

0.9995
50

100
Instances

150

0.999
0

200

(a)
Data Set
D1
D2
D3
D4

50

100
Variables

150

200

(b)
CCOT
g
m
100
100
83
97
99
98
73
86

CCOT-GW
g
m
98
100
81
72
93
97
70
87

(c)
Figure 2. Vectors (a) α and (b) β obtained with CCOT on D3.
(c) Number of times CCOT and CCOT-GW correctly detect the
number of co-clusters (g and m) over 100 trials.

To summarize, CCOT and CCOT-GW outperform all the
other baselines for the considered data structures and
present two important advantages: (1) they do not suffer
from the initialization issues, (2) they are able to detect automatically the number co-clusters.
4.2. MovieLens
Data and setting M OVIE L ENS-100K2 is a popular
benchmark data set that consists of user-movie ratings, on
a scale of one to five, collected from a movie recommendation service gathering 100,000 ratings from 943 users on
1682 movies. In the context of co-clustering, our goal is
to find homogeneous subgroups of users and films in order
to further recommend previously unseen movies that were
2

https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/100k/

Co-clustering through Optimal Transport

highly rated by the users from the same group.
We set the regularization parameters for CCOT and
CCOT-GW using the cross-validation; the number of samplings for CCOT is set to 500 (as the dimensions of the data
set are quite balanced); the weights for the barycenter in
CCOT-GW are set to ε = (0.5, 0.5).
(a)

Results In what follows we only present figures and results obtained by CCOT-GW as both algorithms return the
same number of blocks and the partitions are almost identical (with a normalized mutual information between partitions above 0.8). CCOT-GW automatically detects a structure consisting of 9 × 15 blocks, that corresponds to 9 user
clusters and 15 movie clusters. From Figure 3, one can
observe that the users and the movies are almost equally
distributed across clusters, except for two user and three
movie clusters which have a larger size than others.

250

200

(b)

Figure 4. (a) M OVIE L ENS matrix; (b) the matrix summarized by
the mean rating (0 ratings are excluded) for each block obtained
with CCOT-GW. Darker shades indicate lower values.

responds to users who liked movies from M10 better than
the rest of the users. These observations are also very similar to the results reported by (Banerjee et al., 2007), where
the authors proposed a detailed study of a 10 × 20 blocks
structure for this data set. Additional results can be found
in the Supplementary material.

Number of movies

Number of users

200

150

100

50

0

5. Conclusions and future perspectives

150

100

50

1

2

3

4 5 6 7
User clusters

8

(a)

9

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Movie clusters

(b)

Figure 3. Distribution of the number of (a) users and (b) movies
across the clusters obtained with CCOT-GW.

Figure 4 shows the original data set as well as a summarized version where each block is represented by its mean
rating value (the lighter the block, the higher the ratings),
revealing a structure into homogeneous groups. One can
observe that the first movie cluster consists of films for
which all users agree on giving high ratings (most popular movies) while the last movie cluster consists of the
movies with very low ratings. We also report the 5 best
rated movies in those two clusters in Table 3. One can
easily see that popular movies, such that both Star Wars
episodes are in M1 while M5 is composed of movies that
were less critically acclaimed.
Table 3. Top 5 of movies in clusters M1 and M15.
M1
Star Wars (1977)
The Lion King (1994)
Return of the Jedi (1983)
Contact (1997)
Raiders of the lost ark (1981)

M15
Amytiville: A New Generation (1993)
Amytiville: It’s About Time (1992)
Ninjas: High Noon at Mega Mountain (1998)
Sudden Manhattan (1996)
Dream Man (1995)

We can make similar observations for the interpretation of
user clusters. For instance, the last two user clusters include
users that tend to give less good ratings to movies than the
average population. Also, we note that block (6, 10) cor-

In this paper we presented a novel approach for coclustering based on the entropy regularized optimal transport. Our method is principally different from other coclustering methods and consists in finding a probabilistic
coupling of the empirical measures defined based on the
data instances and features. We showed how this procedure can be seen as the variational inference problem and
that the inferred distribution can be used to obtain the row
and feature partitions. The resulting algorithm is not only
more accurate than other state-of-the-art methods but also
fast and capable of automatically detecting the number of
co-clusters. We also presented an extended version of our
algorithm that makes use of the optimal transportation distance defined on similarity matrices associated to the rows’
and columns’ empirical measures.
In the future, our work can be continued in multiple directions. First, we would like to extend our method in order to
deal with the online setting where the goal is to classify a
new previously unseen observation without the need to do
the co-clustering of the data set that includes it. This can
be done using a recent approach proposed in (Perrot et al.,
2016) that allows to update the learned coupling matrix using the out-of-sample observations without recomputing it
using all the data. We believe that this extension will make
our algorithm attractive for the exploitation in real-time industrial recommendation systems due to its computational
efficiency. We would also like to study the generalization
properties of our algorithm in a spirit similar to the results obtained in (Maurer & Pontil, 2010). This latter work
presents a rare case where the generalization bounds are derived for some famous unsupervised learning algorithms.

Co-clustering through Optimal Transport

Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the ANR project
COCLICO, ANR-12-MONU-0001.

References
Banerjee, Arindam, Dhillon, Inderjit, Ghosh, Joydeep,
Merugu, Srujana, and Modha, Dharmendra S. A
generalized maximum entropy approach to bregman
co-clustering and matrix approximation. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 8:1919–1986, December
2007.
Benamou, Jean-David, Carlier, Guillaume, Cuturi, Marco,
Nenna, Luca, and Peyré, Gabriel. Iterative Bregman Projections for Regularized Transportation Problems. SIAM
Journal on Scientific Computing, 2(37):A1111–A1138,
2015.
Bishop, Christopher M. Pattern Recognition and Machine
Learning (Information Science and Statistics). SpringerVerlag New York, Inc., 2006.
Cheng, Kin-On, Law, Ngai-Fong, Siu, Wan-Chi, and Liew,
Alan W. Identification of coherent patterns in gene expression data using an efficient biclustering algorithm
and parallel coordinate visualization. BMC Bioinformatics, 9:210, 2008.
Courty, Nicolas, Flamary, Rémi, and Tuia, Devis. Domain
adaptation with regularized optimal transport. In Proceedings ECML/PKDD 2014, pp. 1–16, 2014.

Ding, C., Li, T., Peng, W., and Park, H. Orthogonal nonnegative matrix tri-factorizations for clustering. In Proceedings ACM SIGKDD, pp. 126–135, 2006.
George, T. and Merugu, S. A scalable collaborative filtering framework based on co-clustering. In Proceedings
ICDM, pp. 625–628, 2005.
Govaert, G. and Nadif, M. Co-clustering. John Wiley &
Sons, 2013.
Hanisch, Daniel, Zien, Alexander, Zimmer, Ralf, and
Lengauer, Thomas. Co-clustering of biological networks and gene expression data. BMC Bioinformatics,
18(suppl 1):145–154, 2002.
Harten, Amiram. Eno schemes with subcell resolution.
Journal of Computational Physics, 83:148–184, 1989.
Hartigan, J. A. Direct Clustering of a Data Matrix. Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 67(337):123–
129, 1972.
Hoffman, Matthew D. and Blei, David M. Stochastic structured variational inference. In Proceedings AISTATS,
volume 38, pp. 361–369, 2015.
I. Abraham, R. Abraham, M. Bergounioux and Carlier, G.
Tomographic reconstruction from a few views: a multimarginal optimal transport approach. Applied Mathematics and Optimization, pp. 1–19, 2016.

Cuturi, Marco. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. In Proceedings NIPS, pp.
2292–2300, 2013.

Irpino, Antonio, Verde, Rosanna, and De Carvalho, Francisco de A.T. Dynamic clustering of histogram data
based on adaptive squared wasserstein distances. Expert
Systems with Applications, 41(7):3351–3366, 2014.

Cuturi, Marco and Avis, David. Ground metric learning.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):533–564,
2014.

Kantorovich, Leonid. On the translocation of masses. In
C.R. (Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS(N.S.), volume 37(10),
pp. 199–201, 1942.

Cuturi, Marco and Doucet, Arnaud. Fast computation of
wasserstein barycenters. In Proceedings ICML, pp. 685–
693, 2014.

Kar, Purushottam and Jain, Prateek. Similarity-based learning via data driven embeddings. In NIPS, pp. 1998–
2006, 2011.

Deodhar, M. and Ghosh, J. Scoal: A framework for simultaneous co-clustering and learning from complex data.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data,
4(3):1–31, 2010.

Keribin, Christine, Brault, Vincent, Celeux, Gilles, and Govaert, Gérard. Estimation and selection for the latent
block model on categorical data. Statistics and Computing, 25(6):1201–1216, 2015.

Dhillon, Inderjit S., Mallela, Subramanyam, and Kumar,
Rahul. A divisive information theoretic feature clustering algorithm for text classification. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 3:1265–1287, 2003a.

Knight, Philip A. The sinkhorn-knopp algorithm: Convergence and applications. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 30(1):261–275, March 2008.

Dhillon, Inderjit S., Mallela, Subramanyam, and Modha,
Dharmendra S. Information-theoretic co-clustering. In
Proceedings ACM SIGKDD, pp. 89–98, 2003b.

Laird, N. Nonparametric maximum likelihood estimation
of a mixing distribution. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 73:805–811, 1978.

Co-clustering through Optimal Transport

Matei, Basarab and Meignen, Sylvain. Nonlinear cellaverage multiscale signal representations: Application
to signal denoising. Signal Processing, 92:2738–2746,
2012.
Maurer, Augusto and Pontil, Massimiliano. K -dimensional
coding schemes in hilbert spaces. IEEE Trans. Information Theory, 56(11):5839–5846, 2010.
Mémoli, Facundo. Gromov-wasserstein distances and the
metric approach to object matching. Foundations of
Computational Mathematics, 11(4):417–487, 2011.
Mirkin, Boris Grigorievitch. Mathematical classification
and clustering. Nonconvex optimization and its applications. Kluwer academic publ, Dordrecht, Boston, London, 1996.
Monge, Gaspard. Mémoire sur la théorie des déblais et des
remblais. Histoire de l’Académie Royale des Sciences,
pp. 666–704, 1781.
Nadif, M. and Govaert, G. Algorithms for model-based
block gaussian clustering. In DMIN’08, the 2008 International Conference on Data Mining, 2008.
Patrikainen, A. and Meila, M. Comparing subspace clusterings. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 18(7):902–916, July 2006.
Perrot, Michaël, Courty, Nicolas, Flamary, Rémi, and
Habrard, Amaury. Mapping estimation for discrete optimal transport. In NIPS, pp. 4197–4205, 2016.
Peyré, Gabriel, Cuturi, Marco, and Solomon, Justin.
Gromov-wasserstein averaging of kernel and distance
matrices. In Proceedings of the 33nd International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2016, New York
City, NY, USA, June 19-24, 2016, pp. 2664–2672, 2016.
Rabin, Julien, Peyré, Gabriel, Delon, Julie, and Bernot,
Marc. Wasserstein barycenter and its application to texture mixing. In Proceedings SSVM, volume 6667, pp.
435–446, 2011.
Rocci, R. and Vichi, M. Two-mode multi-partitioning.
Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 52(4):
1984–2003, 2008.
Rubner, Yossi, Tomasi, Carlo, and Guibas, Leonidas J. The
earth mover’s distance as a metric for image retrieval. International Journal on Computer Vision, 40(2):99–121,
2000.
Schrödinger, E.
Uber die umkehrung der naturgesetze. Sitzungsberichte Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin. Phys.
Math., 144:144–153, 1931.

Shan, Hanhuai and Banerjee, Arindam. Residual bayesian
co-clustering for matrix approximation. In Proceedings
of the SIAM International Conference on Data Mining,
SDM 2010, April 29 - May 1, 2010, Columbus, Ohio,
USA, pp. 223–234, 2010.
Sinkhorn, Richard and Knopp, Paul. Concerning nonnegative matrices and doubly stochastic matrices. Pacific
Journal of Mathematics, 21:343–348, 1967.
Villani, Cédric.
Optimal transport :
old and
new. Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften.
Springer, Berlin, 2009.
Wang, Pu, Domeniconi, Carlotta, and Laskey, Kathryn. Latent dirichlet bayesian co-clustering. Machine Learning
and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 522–537,
2009.
Wilcoxon, F. Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods. Biometrics Bulletin, 1(6):80–83, December 1945.
Wyse, Jason and Friel, Nial. Block clustering with collapsed latent block models. Statistics and Computing,
22(2):415–428, 2012.
Wyse, Jason, Friel, Nial, and Latouche, Pierre. Inferring structure in bipartite networks using the latent block
model and exact ICL. ArXiv e-prints, 2014.
Xu, Bin, Bu, Jiajun, Chen, Chun, and Cai, Deng. An exploration of improving collaborative recommender systems
via user-item subgroups. In Proceedings WWW, pp. 21–
30, 2012.

